1327 = 23x57 + 16, in the architect's speech he mentions 23 individuals, 16 female and 7 males. This might all be a really nice coincidence, but still...
14 blob in cosmix duality,
16 females and 7 males he gonna plant the seeds of war between 7 males, architect is wise man
17Ngm1z32AYAaq4PcGWRcduaLiTYxcL1sy
1. "Archi" + "tect" = "Architect"
"1... are you looking for private keymaker?" - this was the hint to use causality
"1... are you looking for the private keymaker?"
1FbAyiNyaNGyrHDxJxFj4DYBhyymsSEFWo
1why are you looking for the private keymaker? You come to me, without why. Come to me with why and you'll have the power to continue.
1- yellowblueprimesmatrixsumlistlastwordsbeforearchichoiceyinyangwewontgiveawaythepassworditsinfrontofyoureyesbutyourenotseeingitverylaststepisatruegiveawaypromised    (reverse binary)
1 ..... you looking for the keymaker ??
2. Cosmic Duality
2nd door is SalPhaseIon and Cosmic Duality
2 small ones and the XL one (cosmic duality)
2 - They would be working on Cosmic Duality at this moment, especially if it looked like others might be about to solve SalPhaseIon as well... (we dont know if Cosmic will be easier, the same, or harder than SalPhaseIon)
2) this logic did not only map the prime numbers but also revealed the perfect yin/yang
2) we are looking for the keymaker
3.2.2 AES I believe strongly is the main key and if another is found in puzzle it will just be the compressed version of the starting wallet anyways.... Yin yang
3 - Salphaseion and cosmic duality
3) the yin/yang consist of 7 distinct parts, that are all a perfect mirror of eachother
5. Reference to Yin-Yang
6) yinyang / X
7 "March" - 7 intertwined passwords. 2,011 is a binary spiral. Karma 20404 is a trap for unnecessary thinking. It is the architect's speech. SOLVED
89 prime is yin yang(odd and even) 24th prime too(yellow blue number sum) if you map b in dbbi
9780705406963 is a prime number and it is ISBN of Cosmic Duality book
abba = 0110 itself already a yin yang, too many speculation haha
a Cosmic Duality one
Actually i always think why matrix architect said 23 individuals in which 16 female and 7 male, 16 females over 7 males ? 🧐 how can they manage ? Biased Architect 😒
Actually john(beatles) write the lyrics of I am walrus in 2 LSd trip and the lyrics have chaos based words, yellow custord like that, and the B side side of this is Hello good bye(ciao) and you can check wikipedia as well that it clearly mention there that this songs based on duality, in a interview of beatles management, they clearly used words, duality
Actually, reminded me of that conversation. The Frenchman chastises our crew when they say they are there for the keymaker. They’re there because “they were sent here… told to come here and obeyed.” Dunno, feels vaguely relevant, adding it to my crazy cork board of despair.
Actually since beggning i'm stand on my thinking is Fubcd-king is the right answer, Just zeroed out Bd and you got in hand Fucking oracle queen, you have fucking combo of oracle and queen, wow
actually zion gets rebooted regardless of what architect choice neo would follow
add "yellow blue prime s matrix sum list last words before archi choice yin yang we wont give away the password its in front of your eyes but youre not seeing it very last step is a true give away promised."
after cosmic duality
Afterlife with Archie: Zombie world vs. normal Riverdale is a cosmic duality, with Archie as the balance.
After many days of intensive work trying to solve the GSMG puzzle, I've decided to share my progress publicly. While I wasn't able to find the final solution myself, I've successfully decrypted the Cosmic Duality phase and made significant breakthroughs that could help the community move forward.
After many years, having finished his journey, Socrates understood that what the Oracle did was not give him wisdom.  Nor did Socrates believe that he was already wise in his youth.  What the Oracle did was instigate.  It was provocative.  Socrates was not wise.  He became wise precisely because of his search for an answer to what the Delphic Oracle had said.  And in doing so he ended up validating the phrase uttered by the Greek writer Heliodorus:
after salph, after decrypting cosmic duality - which is a long text - we aquire the key to open the door to the 3.2 aes.
After the architects dialog, she hands Neo a red candy, and she takes one too.
a fubcd-king and oracle-queen thingky mvps on a sad board but as wide as the first one seen
"A fubcd-king & oracle-queen, thingky mvps, on a sad board but as wide as the first one seen"
"A fubcd-king & oracle-queen, thingky mvps, on a sad board but as wide as the first one seen."
A fubcd-king & oracle-queen, thingky mvps, on a sad board but as wide as the first one seen
A fubcd-king & oracle-queen, thingky mvps, on a sad board but as wide as the first one seen.
Again "just got prime" don't know what is sum list or whats the relation of matrix with it, and what is yin yang, is totally differ or unknown, but the second door for prime is in front of you with half prime numbers and rest within puzzle, still not connected with overall mindset, just trying to find connection, but yes second door is not link, its within puzzle with half set of prime numbers
agreed if i consider jrk is architect as per puzzle then jrk used choice word twice(one in morse code type and one in clear way)
ah could be anything... my first thought was architect and Oracle
AI just help you for info, extraction from in metaphorically way only can done by beautiful minds, That's the reason this puzzle is waiting for that mind which can match the frequency with puzzle architect
aka cracking phase 3.2.2 with cosmic duality
a layman's metaphysical study by Time Life, is about the opposing forces in the Cosmos, their root in religious traditions, and what they mean for humanity and man's spiritual quest. In the universe there are many dualities: God and Satan, light and darkness, male and female, good and evil, innocence and experience, life and death. The most openly dualistic religion of all time is that of the Persian prophet Zoroaster (Zarathustra), with the good God in eternal conflict with the god of destruction. Zoroaster preached an anti-ascetic creed, as the things of this world are the creation of the good deity. Other religions looked at matter, considering it evil, such as the later Gnostics, Manicheans, Bogomils and Cathars, who were heretics as they considered the material presence of Christ and the Cross as wicked and to be ashamed of. Alchemists tried to integrate their souls into a fusion with eternity, along with their well-known attempts to transform base metal into gold. The philosophies of Descartes and Marx are also discussed as coming from earlier dualistic methods of thought. The treatment of the duality between men and women is not very informative, as this book is published by the Establishment, and the difference between the sexes is looked at as socially constructed although the sociobiological standpoint is briefly mentioned. A great many bizarre subjects are touched upon including exorcism, apparitions of the Virgin Mary, Satanism, the dark side of fairy tales, angelic hierarchies, voodoo, witchcraft, pagan fertility rite, Tantric sex-magic, hermaphrodites, the Seven Deadly Sins, stigmata, Yin-yang, odd religious cults and a host of other things. _Cosmic Duality_ is a work of relativism, not of definite insight, leaning toward the feminist Mother Goddess myth as humanity's primordial faith, along with theological and social liberalism in general. However, it does end with a statement by William James, "one might say that it consists of a belief that there is an unseen order, and that our supreme good lies in harmoniously adjusting ourselves thereto."
Alguém.passou do cosmic duality?
All have just philosophy since 2020 and puzzle each words have itself a wikipedia and yin yang have too much reference in this puzzle, creator said typo will not affect the puzzle but typos is changing meaning of content, example AND OR, Waisting, Four(ty) so no solution come after 2020 instead of hints of creator 🤷‍♂️
All information to solve cosmic duality is here in this chat
All of the aforementioned series (Life with Archie, Archie Marries Veronica / Archie Marries Betty, Archie: The Decision, Afterlife with Archie, the main Archie series) have elements of cosmic duality, primarily through:
all point to cosmic duality  or   wht creator put thath
all the pop culture references are exploring the same themes of duality and free will
also here u see the cover of the cosmic duality when counting from 21-28 based on the occurance of colors when you divide the img into 4 squares, but dont get stuck in that rabbit hole, it has alot of them
Also, I think "HALF AND BETTER HALF" means "yin yang" and it means "multi signature" so we need to find two private keys..
Also, on phase 2 "Merovingian" phase:
also the half and better half could be the Oracle and the architecture ..
also the keymaker here might be openssl
also there are two people's statements that intrigue me: the dude who fonud the cosmic duality yin yang reference and Janusz who arrived the the primes step
also there is no way to decrypt cosmic duality aes before progressing on Salph
also this could be interpreted as a yin yang if you think about it
Also, why name a stage "cosmic duality" ? Might be rephrased "look how cool we are, we enciphered multilayer message, that you searched for 7+ years"
also with yin yang could it be referring the number 69? Jrk Bgrt said it was "specific" but the picture of the yin yang is actually the incorrect way to draw yinyang. it should be drawn like "pd" instead "69"
and all of salphaseion answers hashed would decrypt cosmic duality?
and also the part about hope .. greatst strength a d greatest weakness .. it a yin yinyang .. i believe in this ..
And another concept its following poaching and alcohol, yao ming is yin yang of nba and related to this puzzle as well(will explain later)
And by the way one morw thing, archi means string, if you think it is architect, the synonyms of archi is string, means music key note
And ciao and hello good bye shown duality and yin yang because ciao or chao means both as per duality, good bye and hello
And cosmic duality am I late?
and cosmic duality is not there for fun
and duality principle
and for the Architect all you get is "ME"
and heres your yin yang
and i also checked if there are multiple prints of the cosmic duality book and if they differe
And i didn't discuss it before but yellow blue prime and yin yang may be (python), i don't think about btc now, just wanna solved this puzzle
And if cosmic duality is realetd with 4 elements, these will help
And if everyone could just forget the dam architect and neo and the matrix for a week or two (no offense but 3 years later should say let the matrix crash and die already cause it aint workin for ya)
And if I imagine that the two and duality.
and if the solve the salphation that's mean they hit the yin yang ..
And if you got it, then you got the yin yang too, just you need prime after that
and it is the same part of the conversation where the two choices were presented to neo by the architect, the left and the right door
and jrk's hint (the binary shit with yellow blue primes matrix sum list yinyang) is actually 2 hints: one for salph one for 3.2
and like the yin yang is like a letter b and letter g
and next phase is cosmic duality
And over time, guess what happens?  Your experience and knowledge will serve as inspiration and guide to others.  You will become the oracle for others who wish to pursue their own goals.  And it is precisely at this moment that your knowledge and experience will find another characteristic without which wisdom makes no sense: humility!  Humility to share and continue learning from those with whom we share.
and possibly even the cosmic duality book
and reading cosmic duality which is a bit creepy for my taste
And reverse of 24 is 42 abd 42th prime is 181 combo of odd and even, yin yang is even odd, rest still trying to understand
And sorry about that, i can't wait  for my drink now, please think about yin yang first, if understand it you can see whole things as per yin yang in puzzle and yin yang is just not chinese, in  every religion its mentioned accordingly👍🏻
and the creator also mentioned how "yinyang" is a very specific hint
and the fead is the yinyang ..
And the hilarious one is yinyang Sum is 17 as gematria numerals
and the lastwordsbeforarchichice is the yinyang
and then you would use all the information from salvation to decrypt cosmic duality
And the other code something   Cosmic Duality ?
And the salphaseion & Cosmic Duality
And the ying yang duality method was dual linear program
and the yin yang he mentioned is in text in that same little paragraph
And use yin yang for faed
and we don't know the password to cosmic duality AES blob yet
and we will hit "yinyang"
And what exactly is yin/yang supposed to be? It seems like a dead end, like two opposing things: up/down, black/white, 1/0. Do you see it?
and what is architect choice ?
and when you hit the yin yang you gonna solve it in the same day
And yes in last " cheshire cat" is the duality in all over the puzzle for which creator mentioned clearly
And your yin yang not "yingyang" you were looking for will not work mate, i know what is you for searching mate" believe me its not that yingyang your are looking for 😂😂 i got what are you searching in your words, i already tried "sd and cat as well, its not
another better half in matrix is "Persephone"
another code to drow in all of yin yang in the image
another door is cosmic duality since it is 100% offline
another thing is yinyang and the lastwordsbeforarchichpice
"anti-merovingian" philosopher
anybody drew a yinyang yet?
Any idea about yin yang ?
Any idea on fubcd-king and oracle-queen
anyone at cosmic duality?
Anyone else got Chinese language from cosmic duality 😂?
Anyone knows why phase 2 and cosmic duality have the same part at beginning ? U2FsdGVkX18
anyone noticed how Cosmic Duality html heading is lowercase as compared to uppercase in Salphaseion
ANYONE SOLVED THE SALPHASEION AND COSMIC DUALITY PHASE?
Anyone that has made it past SalPhaseIon into Cosmic Duality......
Anyway before i start drinking, i waana inform you all, "please think about yin yang" if white is there then there must be black as well" Cheers and good luck👍🏻
A password for duality, where you will be able to find password for both aes blob
Archie Comics Series with Correlates to Cosmic Duality
Archie Comics uses the multiverse (Betty vs. Veronica's timeline) to explore duality, just as The Matrix uses simulation vs. reality. In both cases, the main characters are trapped in a cycle that maintains this duality, with last words or critical moments symbolizing cosmic uncertainty.
Archie's death in Life with Archie #36 and Neo's temporary death in The Matrix are culminating points that maintain the cosmic duality. Archie dies without choosing, maintaining the balance between Betty and Veronica. Neo dies but resurrects, maintaining the balance between the Matrix and the real world. Both are cosmic sacrifices to maintain the narrative.
Archie: The Decision (2024): The pressure to choose is a cosmic battle, but Archie remains ambiguous, maintaining the duality.
* architect blob its not clear either
Architect choice ...
ARCHITECT: Just how long do you think this peace is going to last?
ARCHITECT: Obviously, they will be freed.
Architect states 2 doors (so there are your 2)
Architect : ...There are two doors. The door to your right leads to the Source, and the salvation of Zion. The door to your left leads back to the Matrix, to her and to the end of your species.
Architect: "There are two doors. The door to your right leads to the Source and the salvation of Zion. The door to your left leads back to the Matrix, to her, and to the end of your species. As you adequately put, the problem is choice."
architecture choice juat the yinyang
ARCHITECT: What do you think I am? Human?
ARCHITECT: What others?
Architect: Which brings us at last to the moment of truth, wherein the fundamental flaw is ultimately expressed, and the anomaly revealed as both beginning and end. There are two doors. The door to your right leads to the Source, and the salvation of Zion. The door to your left leads back to the Matrix, to her and to the end of your species. As you adequately put, the problem is choice.
ARCHITECT: You played a very dangerous game.
Architect: Your life is the sum of a remainder of an unbalanced equation inherent to the programming of the Matrix
Are we ready for yinyang?
> Are you looking for the private keymaker?
... are you looking for the private keymaker?" You come to me, without it. Come to me with it and you'll have the power to continue. It'll grant the first part.
Are you only looking for the btc?...   <— (unknown.... maybe we are looking for the "why?" as Merovingian points out with "causality")
Are you saying that the Yin Yang is the piano keys? I've tried it, but I can't apply it in any way :(
"as above, so below" maybe even "yin yang"
Aside from that, the last series of hints seems to really imply the need for inversion/reflection. The ying yang represents harmony by means of equal forces nullifying each other, which is on theme (Neo and Smith, the Architect and the Oracle, and the mantra of the last movie regarding beginnings and ends). Far from the first person to observe this, but ending at the beginning and “follow the white rabbit” being “our last command” heavily implies that the finish line is back at the first puzzle (or, imho, on the seedisplanted page, which is where you can input a different password and PULL request and presumably be taken to another area of the website AND satisfies the hint that we should return when we have the “private keymaker”). These hints were given in reverse binary, which I feel has to be a giveaway to a solution, but beats the fuck out of me as to which. The cruelty of this last stretch seems to be an abundance of keys in search of the right lock.
As if Safenet was the keymaker tho
as raw password not the actual sha to decrypt cosmic duality which also worked
as the architect sayd perhaps the solution requires a lesser mind XD
At first I thought "lastwordsbeforearchichoice" was a reference to the Architect from the movie, but now it seems more like it’s pointing to the "last words before choice the architecture/pattern," maybe from dbbi/faed — with the password being either sha256 or double sha256(matrixsumlist).
Back to theme, the replacement of Neo/the One with “you” in the puzzle so far seems too clunky to not be relevant. Also worth being on the lookout for names and concepts from the movies that haven’t been used yet (Morpheus, Smith, Trinity, Cypher, Zion, etc.). (One of) the key(s) belonging to “a better half” points to Trinity, the Oracle, or even Smith as part of the answer.
Back to yin yang tho.....
@barrystyle [https://t.me/barrystyle] how did you miss a detail in Cosmic Duality book
@barrystyle [https://t.me/barrystyle], provided a very specific hint already. (Cosmic Duality Book Page - Life and Death)
basically we just need to find the password for the cosmic duality base64 code and we should solve it (?)
BE AN ORACLE FOR SOMEONE
becausae its duality
because Architect says if he's father then Oracle is the mother of the matrix
because basically the architect says if he is the father of the matrix that Oracle is the mother... and Oracle should be the better half
Because I also believe that to solve AES blob of 3.2 you first need to clearly understand what the architect dialogue is about, I mean what's hidden and how to use that part to get some information or direction on solving the AES.
because I am inside cosmic duality already
because in fact, even the book Cosmic Duality is part of a larger series of books about everything.
because Neo does not follow architect's choice
because there is no Duality without salvation
Because the whole concept was from yin yang story(everything)
because they are yin yang of encryptions
Because when the cosmic duality was posted then jrk said very specific, before that there was no sign of yin yang word, but jrk used this word for the cosimc duality in his reverse binary hint,
before archi, what is archi? architecture?
Before the message "im very close give me a clue" I had written the solution to cosmic duality
Believe me you are very close, just hit the yin yang, which is keeping me to reach there, there are many theories of yin yang, brute force with guesses will take time too even i have 3-4 guesses due to yin yang
below is an example that was also part of the scene where Neo met with the architect
better half = cosmic duality
better half is wife of Merovingian - Persephone
better half of keymaker
binary converts to "theseedisplanted" with an extra 0000 for padding, this padding is needed for the grid to be a complete square but also could be a hint itself... "yourlifeisthesumof" text said that bruteforcing may be required, if you dont know what a "padding oracle attack" is, look it up, it is used mainly for CBC encoded text...
Binary was invented on iching theory(yin yang theory) good luck 👍🏻
Black and white are in perfect combination as per duality, the abnormality is in (9 yellow and 15 yellow)
block 103 give us multiple primes and also a yinyang form
boolean logic is what im reading up on now tho in regards to the yin yang thing from an encoding/encryption angle
Breaking into the first blob and then cosmic duality
Buddy tuna you(keymaker) cryptoluna
But at the same time I’m just testing theory’s I’m not sure how many finished cosmic duality so I’m trying to get that step ahead
But both address can't be yin yang, i think yin yang is the unsolved part of that hint
But did you notice if you layer the comic duality you find another rabbit not sure if this is helpful
but have you noticed how every chapter capital letter starts with an yinyang?
But here issue is yin yang
But if archi is not the architect, archi = Archetypal
But if someone ask me that if there is a key hidden, then may be, but it will be confirmed that once you cracked cosmic duality, i am sure in which u will have final puzzle to found the key via cosmic duality decryption within puzzle or encryption
But in SalPhaseIons case, this is us clearly believing in what we want things to be, instead of facing reality and facts; such as the unpleasant truth that "cosmic duality" is a part of the puzzle which comes "after" SalPhaseIon (so there is no way this could be a private key as this is clearly not the end of the puzzle)
but i think you are right, the whole name of the phase is salphasetion which i think refers to the part where the architect talks about the salvation of zion
but it makes sense because of the yinyang being "duality" describes it as both humanity's greatest strength and weakness
But it was mentioned on the door of oracle
but i will take that a step further and propose that yinyang is alpha and omega, showing you that the rabbit is something the beginning and the end of the puzzle
But jrk said yin yang is for next phase(means cosmic)
but oracle and arch are programs, they don't need funds...
but prime, yinyang, sumlist everything here
But that's what happened with heisenberg, jacque fresco, the merovingian... those were long ass strings
But the architect left us something to VIEW
But the duality would still make sense because they were both apart to form 1 single encoded string
But trying to decypher cosmic duality using this passphrase
But we have not encountered the Oracle along this journey yet so I would anticipate we find her in cosmic duality
But what if Merovingian is wrong?
but you are next level and claiming decrypted whole Cosmic Duality AES blob
but you need the most of salvation to get into cosmic duality
* By recognizing the duality, you can approach the puzzle with a more strategic mindset.
By the way, if you remove the spaces in Salph and encrypt it using VIC. You will get a length of 1539 characters, which is the same as the Architect's speech in phase 3.2
By the way, you need to see yinyang
By thinking about "cosmic duality", you are taking an important step towards unlocking the secrets of "SalPhaseIon".
Can someone explain what ying yang looks like I mean we all know salphaselon and cosmic duality but why would you get the idea of ying yang or where
can someone post a sheet of all the hints the creator of the puzzle has given thus far. Including things like yin yang c
Can this pattern have something to do with yin yang?
Can you find the key just using the primary puzzle & primes or is salph and/or 3.2 needed? salph could be one half and 3.2 the other or they could both lead to the same thing. Then theres cosmic duality which likely needs dbbi + faed to unlock it.
can you please let me know how did you reached to "yellowblueprimesmatrixsumlistlastwordsbeforearchichoiceyinyangwewontgiveawaythepassworditsinfrontofyoureyesbutyourenotseeingitverylaststepisatruegiveawaypromised" ?
Causalitydualitylast is first part of the cosmic duality code
Causality was answer to "are you looking for the private keymaker" question
Choice as the Center of Cosmic Duality
choiceisanillusioncreatedbetweenthosewithpowerandthosewithoutaveryspecialdessert, choiceisanillusioncreatedbetweenthosewithpowerandthosewithoutaveryspecialdessertiwroteitmyself, yinyang
ciao bella o is not architect it's jrk himself , so no that's not the last words.
Clearly mentioned with words " duality"
Clearly the logic behind the puzzle has not been discovered by anyone, thats the yinyang, when u see it all for what it really is
Comic duality solution
common sense would seem to indicate that jrk has already provided the solution to dbbi and faed... when he provided the binary that resulted in this string: "yellowblueprimesmatrixsumlistlastwordsbeforearchichoiceyinyangwewontgiveawaythepassworditsinfrontofyoureyesbutyourenotseeingitverylaststepisatruegiveawaypromised"   dbbi is a good match for 'yellowblueprimes" and faed is a good match for the "yinyang.." string ... both encrypted strings are roughly 5 times larger than the plaintext. I think we need to move forward with all the data we have. As Jrk said, it could even be solved without the internet now.
Completly unlocked cosmic duality
Conclusion for "Cosmic Duality": This is extremely likely to be AES in the OpenSSL format.  The decryption failure (the "padding is incorrect" error you encountered) points much more to a bad password or, less likely, a different hashing algorithm used in key derivation (other than MD5 or SHA256 which we have already tested), than to a completely different cipher algorithm like Rabbit. If it were Rabbit, the Salted__ prefix would either not be there or would have a different meaning.
Congratulate me! I've solved Salph and Cosmic duality:
Congratulations messages is only possible to be at Cosmic Duality.
Congratulations! You have solved the Cosmic Duality challenge.
"Congratulations. You've navigated the causality of the matrix. But as the Oracle said, everything that has a beginning has an end.
Consciousness and subconsciousness. This is the yin-yang of this puzzle, a brilliant mind is cool, even very cool. But this leads to a lot of cognitive errors. The path has programmed consciousness to be under the control of the subconscious. "Opening your eyes" in this situation is the solver's greatest strength. A brilliant mind is powerless here, although it will be very useful.
Considering that the Architect (a Sage from Above) told Neo from afar that people have two choices - to leave the matrix or stay in it. And the guys from GSM from afar say in direct words that leaving this matrix with a rabbit costs 140 investments and we will not solve the puzzle. It will be very "funny" if there really is no solution. And the essence of this puzzle is making the right choice - getting out of the matrix, instead of chasing worthless trophies. And the prize is an understanding, not a decision and a reward for it.
(consider the constellation part, nice fit in theory and context for "cosmic" duality as well)
Correct me if I'm wrong, but I believe that was from 2021, and 3.2 had been solved to the point we have it now well before that. "Reinserting the prime basics" was a part of that decoded architect speech.
Cosimc duality is anagram of "AI COULD MYSTIC"
"cosmic duality"
cosmic duality
Cosmic duality
Cosmic duality .
_Cosmic Duality_,
Cosmic Duality
Cosmic Duality:
Cosmic Duality?
CosmicDuality = 13 chars (PRIME)
Cosmic Duality #1 - Jorg Hendriks Collection
cosmic duality AES?
cosmic duality aes 28 lines
Cosmic Duality Aes blob!
Cosmic Duality AES blob can contain very large of information
Cosmic Duality AES blob on GSMG is 1819 chars which is almost similar to AES encryption blob of revealed hint from JRK
cosmic duality binary blob is 1344 bytes * 8 = 10752
Cosmic Duality book
Cosmic Duality Book : Sample pages
Cosmic duality decripted success
Cosmic Duality for all
Cosmic Duality has been defeated
cosmic duality is a thing and its not going to be a giveaway without work of its own involved
"Cosmic Duality is awesome!"
Cosmic duality is encrypted with AES with a certain padding and IV value.
Cosmic duality is last as its 4th stage
cosmic duality is more difficult that half and better half and salvation combined
Cosmic duality its just stage
Cosmic Duality most likely lead us to another puzzle
cosmicdualitymys0000time
Cosmic duality pair
cosmic duality probably just leading us to another puzzle with different prize
Cosmic Duality probably just opened another door to another puzzle. This is amazing but we all clueless.
Cosmic Duality this puzzle is important. The concept of Yin, the half and the better half, relates to two individuals who need funds to live. The number 140 could reference Hal Finney and his wife: 140 was the original Twitter character limit, and Hal’s first tweet is notable. Hal Finney suffered from ALS (amyotrophic lateral sclerosis), a severe neurodegenerative disease, and together with his wife Sandra he participated in fundraising efforts for ALS research to support his health challenges. This connection might be a meaningful hint.
cosmic_duality.txt -> is encoded AES blob of jrk_reveal.txt and it is 1995 characters.
cosmic duality was already known when he say that
Could be the yin yang bowl as we have other half and it's empty... since zeal found private key to the bathroom and stole the paper, it's all bad there too...
could it be possible that cosmic duality is RC4 ????!?
Could it be possible that cosmic duality is RC4 decryption and if not why
Dbbib instructions for using yellow blue and fefefe, faed instructions for yin yang. That's what I'm going with. Those solutions are part of the concatenation for salphasion
Death as a Balancer for Duality
decoding Cosmic Duality: Congratulations on successfully decoding! This is a coded message used to test your decoding skills. Keep it secret and use it wisely.
Decrypted output written to: C:\Users\hp\Music\N\cosmic_duality.bin
Definitely cosmic duality is to uncover.
did actually anyone decrypt the salphaseon blob or the cosmic duality blob? i dotn think so
Did anyone found yingyang? I don't think so, you guys are so smart, when yingyang is reached, 2 hours max.
Did anyone notice that the architect message from phase 3 has exactly 23 BIP words in prime number positions?
- did i found yingyang? -NO
Did someone try book cipher on cosmic duality book
did you decrypt cosmic duality?
Did you see Merovingian after he lost his money 🤣
did you try to inverte the picure, i mean yellow and blue are complementary colors or? could be yinyang
different method of duality
Does anybody have py file for cosmic duality ? With all aes 128, 192, 256 version in single script ?
Does anyone have any idea about this architect's speech? I'm trying to figure out what to do with it. Maybe we are missing something right
Does someone have the cosmic duality book cover and the rabbit 14x14 matrix in one picture I would love to check some things but I’m not at my computer
Does someone have the full original text from the cosmic duality book ?
does the image have any duality in the ??
Don't be an architect. Just look at the beginning.
don't forget that the whole text heavily relies on the orginal architect dialog.
dont think its the yingyang we re looking for.
don't want to sound racist, but I thought the architect was white...
└─ Door 2: Text hash → SalPhaseIon → Cosmic Duality → halves
Do ppl not follow the architecture of the puzzle? Go Watch the matrix movies again…, all movies and come back, i promise it will be the best investment of time spent towards solvind the puzzle
Do we know if the architects or developers of the puzzle are here?
do yin yang with picture not this
Do you have any list of any password which showing behaviour like success and giving unreadable format for cosmic duality ? I wanna try it too
Do you know why creator use word brute force ? 😂 because we can't match our thinking to creator, duality but answer point out to be the singularity
Do you mean a vinyl record with a Yin Yang symbol?
Do you think the third door is in the first picture or in the cosmic duality cover
# Draw an arrow connecting all Yin Yang patterns
draw.line(found_yin_yang, fill="red", width=5, joint='curve')
# Draw numbers around all found Yin Yang patterns
“Dreams and oracles are only understood on the day they come true.”
Duality
DUALITY
duality, everything in pairs
duality in puzzle is between phases 2 and 3
duality... is everywhere in the puzzle.... the yin yang is everywhere in the puzzle
Duality, keys,
duality = men and women
Duality of Keys (public and private key pair)
duality principle says that:
Duality the zero sum game is prime
Duality type double hash
Easy... Salphasion AES having a priv key is same as saying phase 2 AES has a priv key.. think about it, if salphasion has the key then what is cosmic duality????
Either just try to get password of  of cosmic duality where you will get password of both aes 3.2 blob and salphasion blob
enc_file="./where_you_put_cosmic_duality.txt"
end_x, end_y = found_yin_yang[-1]
Enter = the word enter was only mentioned was throughout that scene "The Architect: Apropos, she entered the matrix to save your life at the cost of her own."
Even if we can resolve Cosmic Duality There will still be something to do, there probably won't be a pretty key waiting for you.
even in cosmic duality it says we need to go back to the rabbits nest with more detailed explanations this time
Even in the hint of duality, and the yellow and blue +-1 game, which is called zero sum game
even "yinyang" was mentioned by him again as when found we would be able to solve in a single day...
Every feminie and male couple is yin yang mate as oer duality 🙄
Every one here was lurking around matrix, it is far away from matrix, this is called duality or yin yang
Everyone in this chat has a huge progress, almost solve it all, they have decoded phase 3.2, decoded cosmic duality, found the another door in the bits of main picture...but surely won't show anything to anyone.
Every single clue that jrk mentioned is literally all defined in this one website explaining the yinyang
exactly. in the original architect script it is prime program. but in the puzzle it is BASICS
Extremely common to abbreviate architect as archi; maybe not in murica
Faed could be a whole yin yang image
"..." faed makes the sentence complete and reasonable and more appropriate to get into cosmic duality
final phase is yinyang. yinyang is cosmic duality
first reference to yingyang
First the last phase second the cosmic duality
first we will find/figure out prime number then yinyang
focus on getting into the aes blob in salvation to get the path to yingyang
follow the white rabbit happened in the morning and we're in the evening time wit the Architect, the door to the right and ;eft and choice
for index, (x, y) in enumerate(found_yin_yang, start=1):
Forming a yinyang, prime numbers, "last" number of pi, cosmic duality being very specific, theory of everything
For Noah was chosen by the Architect to lead humanity towards the path of SalPhaseIo
For output of the cosmic duality to be a *.bin file, it should include some file system. I doubt, that one can encode any filesystem in that volume of data.
For the "Cosmic Duality" Block (the big Base64 block):
For yin yang it may be any of like Smith&neo, oracle&architect, trinity&neo, mevo&perse, apoc&switch, morph&neo, binary 0&1 🙄 if we think duality then everything in puzzle belongs to yin yang 🙄
Found the yin yang
found_yin_yang = []
found_yin_yang.append((x, y))
From 14x14 grid + yinyang + yellowblueprimes + matrixsumlist
From Architect part is that what i understood. But its my interpretation :) but people are working on diffrent "doors" someone looking for mnemonic someone for WIFs etc.
from cosmic duality book, p18.
from salvation of Zion phase to the Duality of Agent Smith
Fubcd also could be FABCD - pyramid + king == Solomon, Solomon Oracle - tarot cards
fubcd-king & oracle-queen, thingky mvps
FubcdkingOraclequeenthinkymvps/.
FUBCD ORACLE THINGKY MVPS
fucd-king oracle-queen on sad board... something
funny thing about that line of thinking is that if it took over 4 years to solve salphaseion, what makes people believe that cosmic duality is just magically going to be 100x easier... logic is how this will be solved, not wishful thinking...
gKlIi8aaqY5gpJPPEzW1n9n3/26qs4zstWtPKF8Zs/BTNN4IiEh4qu18mdC0NAv4   , 2) SalPhaseIon a) d b b i b f b h c c b e g b i h a b e b e i h b e g g e g e b e b b g e h h e b h h f b a b f d h b e f f c d b b f c c c g b f b e e g g e c b e d c i b f b f f g i g b e e e a b e  , b) f a e d g g e e d f c b d a b h h g g c a d c f e d d g f d g b g i g a a e d g g i a f a e c g h g g c d a i h e h a h b a h i g c e i f g b f g e f g a i f a b i f a g a e g e a c g b b e a g f g g e e g g a f b a c g f c d b e i f f a a f c i d a h g d e e f g h h c g g a e g d e b h h e g e g h c e g a d f b d i a g e f c i c g g i f d c g a a g g f b i g a i c f b h e c a e c b c e i a i c e b g b g i e c d e g g f g e g a e d g g f i i c i i i f i f h g g c g f g d c d g g e f c b e e i g e f i b g i b g g g h h f b c g i f d e h e d f d a g i c d b h i c g a i e d a e h a h g h h c i h d g h f h b i i c e c b i i c h i h i i i g i d d g e h h d f d c h c b a f g f b h a h e a g e g e c a f e h g c f g g g g c a g f h h g h b a i h i d i e h h f d e g g d g c i h g g g g g h a d a h i g i g b g e c g e d f c d g g a c c d e h i i c i g f b f f h g g a e i d b b e i b b e i i f d g f d h i e e e i e e e c i f d g d a h d i g g f h e g f i a f f i g g b c b c e h c e a b f b e d b i i b f b f d e d e e h g i g f a a i g g a g b e i i c h i e d i f b e h g b c c a h h b i i b i b b i b d c b a h a i d h f a h i i h i c , c) aes blob U2FsdGVkX186tYU0hVJBXXUnBUO7C0+X4KUWnWkCvoZSxbRD3wNsGWVHefvdrd9zQvX0t8v3jPB4okpspxebRi6sE1BMl5HI8Rku+KejUqTvdWOX6nQjSpepXwGuN/jJ 3) Cosmic Duality U2FsdGVkX18tP2/gbclQ5tNZuD4shoV3axuUd8J8aycGCAMoYfhZK0JecHTDpTFe
Gling to apply it within half an hour, twirking yin yang to make pefect answer look like which is asking by JrK
good play that u said u never write about solving AES BLOB partially. theres nothing else than aes blob in cosmic duality u dumbass
google visa from matrix and its in the architects speech "visavis love"
got a  1327-byte Cosmic Duality decryption, unsure if it's a false flag :p
Got the priv key from Cosmic Duality?
<h1> Cosmic Duality </h1>
Half and better half and they do need funds to live is connected with divorce and the lesson amd yes these half and better half almost covered whole puzzle and yin yang as well but i'm missing the actually format of password, like creator wants something that look like a perfect dualism of answer so that number and alpbahet show the meaning in duality but pronounciation is same
half and better half has something to do with yin-yang??
Half and better half is like yinyang, completing each other.
half and better half yin yang maybe
half is phase 3.2 aes blob and better half is cosmic duality
Has anybody found a yin yang? I dont want to chase this one if its known already
Has anyone been able to solve the phase cosmicDuality so far, and if so, please guide me as to what the answer was. Thank you
has anyone decrypted the last 2 base64 blob from SalPhaseIon and CosmicDuality
Has anyone gotten past cosmic duality??
has anyone gotten to the cosmic duality stage, decrypted it and gotten an output of any value? Ive gotten an output that's interesting, but not sure if it's something we've seen before?
Has anyone tried decoding the audio on the mp4 file of the Cosmic Duality NFT? I don’t have the expertise to do it but I can send the mp4
Has any progress been made re cosmic duality? LLM slop has poisoned so many searchable hints.
Hash entire cosmic duality, youll get a hash that ends with «d0d»
Has nobody made any progress in Cosmic duality?))
Has someone the korrekt padding and IV for causalitydualitylast ?
Have dosis(spanish word as per jrk)  of Yingyang already, 👍🏻
havent gotten to the cosmic duality yet, u need an AES key to decrypt AES
Have to crack cosmic duality first where i think we have final round to crack it because Jrk said "maximum 2 hour" so if he decrypt cosmic duality then there is something to solve to get the key for both blobs
Have you already deciphered cosmic duality?
Have you find yinyangVALIS
Have you solved cosmic duality?
He already said yin yang is in next phase (cosmic)...
He also mentioned "when yinyang" reached, 2 hour maximum"
He could write anything without proof it’s useless it would take 3 min to tell us how he did it but he won’t cause he can’t and there is also no solution for sa / Phase / on and Cosmic duality
he dont say yinyang then last words bef3 archichice ..
He have conculsion, just need prime as per me, he already hitted yin yang like me, but he is not seeing
he just quoted matrix architect script
he left something that can be seen but need yin yang and balance
Hello everybody, can you please tell me about the "archi" in "lastwordsbeforeachoise" is this the main choice or a reference to the architect from the matrix?  It's difficult to translate because I don't speak English well
Hello everyone. How are things with SalPhaselon & COSMIC DUALITY? Is there any progress?
Hello everyone. If you think that by achieving the yingyang state you'll solve the puzzle on this day, then you're probably overestimating your powers.
Hello everyоne. Time... the most valuable resource, not money, not power, or anything else, it’s something that you can never get back, that’s what’s most valuable, and people lack individuality, they were offered a choice, and they choose from what’s offered. And if both options are lies, then there is no point in this choice. But in any case, we must always remain human, no matter what the situation, we are all rabbits in a cage of expectations, hopes, and fears and prejudices. The more information I study, the more questions there are, some kind of endless cycle of uncertainty, it’s like looking for a needle in a haystack. The majority have stopped thinking critically; in the digital noise there are only copies, copies. Math rules ^_^
hello, solvers i already descrypt  "cosmic_duality"     what do now?
he meets once more with the Oracle, who states Neo must still reach the Source - not the Architect, but the Machine City itself, where "the path of The One ends".
he mention the yinyang after the last words for architecture
here is one https://z-lib.gd/book/2477596/384f92/mysteries-of-the-unknown-cosmic-duality.html
Here is your yin yang, 100%
he revealed it as yinyang actually
Here you start from 1 in the start and then you start from 0 in the end(new start), which is also duality, yin yang, you must use both combined to form
he said internet is not required anymore so only possible new door is decoding cosmic duality which will output a long text
he said the yin yang is the next phase but no one manage to find it
Hits the yin yang 😃
hm, 4 stages I think. 0=image, 1=seed, 2=keymaker, 3=giveit, 3.2=I've been waiting
hmm are you sure it's aes? I think it's double encoded twofish, yin yang
hmm... king and queen are kind of opposites. as yinyang. interesting.
honestly, i just searched for cosmic duality: mysteries of the unknown
honestly the main difficulty in the architect text part of this puzzle is that a few words were changed, but remember the whole speech still is basically the same as movies...
honest q for whoever's actually deep in salph when you push the chain to the yinyang
hopefully it'll be cosmic duality
Hope yin yang means the same to apply on answer
How about cosmic duality any luck with that
How does 2. Name of the keymakers result in safenet
how do you know "archi" refers to the architect? it could be the prefix "archi" meaning "first": last words before first choice
How do you know there is an author mentioned in Cosmic Duality?
how do you think Cosmic Duality will be decrypted?
how do you think the SalPhaseIon decrypted blob is linked to the Cosmic Duality decrypted blob
However I am releasing a github today with everything and trust me it's valuable if there is a solution. Release will include 3.2 decryption and yin yang along with anything else that is not public. Theory of everything is real so may take some time to gather it all.
However yellow blue yin yang was my curiosity
However you may guys think i'm just kid, so i'm professor of Economics and art masters, not money heist one(😂😂😂😂) so in the age of 37 i have seen everything, and learn may things but yes one thing is always yin yang to me is just IT
How is cosmic duality very specific? Because of duality
How many years has this puzzle been stuck since Cosmic Duality?
How this Duality can help:
How to clarify yin yang in it ? The problem is choice ? Or the balance is ? Or the answer ? That is the issue,
https://archive.org/details/cosmicdualitymys0000time
https://archive.org/details/cosmicdualitymys0000time/mode/2up
https://blog.randomoracle.io/2015/02/25/second-guessing-satoshi-ecdsa-and-bitcoin-part-i/
https://blog.randomoracle.io/2015/08/13/safenet-hsm-key-extraction-vulnerability-part-i/
https://blog.randomoracle.io/2015/08/13/safenet-part-2/
https://github.com/jackdevs66/GSMG5_CDuality
https://github.com/jackdevs66/GSMG5_CDuality Seems it got decrypted
https://news.ycombinator.com/user?id=ChrisArchitect nice little conspiracy for you
https://scottmanning.com/content/the-architect-transcript/
https://www.thoughtco.com/yin-and-yang-629214#toc-a-subtle-and-cosmic-duality
"hush hush" has 2 meanings, like everything has in this duality puzzle.
I actually found the yin yang about a month ago. Maybe for some it could take 2 hours but I'm still learning. It does feel like the right one considering what's there compared to everything else but I'm still stumped.
I also think it's the conversation between Neo and the Architect
I also think salphaseion and cosmic duality are just clues on how to derive the key and the first puzzle piece is all we really need to solve
I always thought about Jrk as the architect
I always thought it was related to the architect of the matrix
I am hung upon yinyang
I am in the yingyang stge aswell since months. We should have worked together
i am just  saying "hardest part is done" means there is easy part in front of you as per creator, so this easy part is unsolved after 5 years,  either this is easy in eye of architect or we are blind
i am just saying that i dont believe that primes leads us to yingyang, at the end you need to combine, yellow , blue , yinyang and primes to proced.
I am not on the salph, i focus on yingyang nonstop.
i am not saying that faed is a no-go(may be it have different transformation) but i am just inform you that if you think dbbi is yellow blue prime then how you will judge "faed" as yin yang ? 🧐
I am not sure what to say about this... I was reading the whole thing since morning when I joined but I must suggest so many of us don't see with our eyes anymore because the stages before this phase were somewhat very difficult to solve so we've been giving out the same energy trying to use the same difficult technique that was used to solve the previous phases but it's not going to work that way. if we need to solve this part we need to first empty our cups and tackle the puzzle from a different perspective. we should start by yingyanging
I are attempting to decrypt an AES-protected file by automatically trying various password combinations based on variations of the word "ying yang", including date formats, days of the week, and SHA256 hashes, in an attempt to find the correct password to access the encrypted contents of the Cosmic Duality block.
I believe 3.2 only solvable after cosmic duality (last phase)
i believe it is the door to unlock cosmic duality
I believe lastwordsbeforearchichoice is just the chunk from the architect custom speech from phase 3.2 between you you and self self, but there are typos in there. Just in case i have a spell checked version to bruteforce too when we get faed and dbbi
I believe Salph elements (DOOR) will unlock Cosmic Duality (last phase)
i believe the yinyang gonna be something like this
i believe to truly solve the puzzle we have to start before 3.2.2 there are more holes in the puzzle for example, this was never properly decoded The ironic 2name of the keymakers trying to protect the current digital powers which are still in severe danger due to the keymaker's way of security by hiding, nearly unprotected, in plain sight. {eps3.4_[in one of the valleys of Phillip]runtime-error.r00., where daughters hit magic keypads} When this fails.. Crypto finally to the latin 3Moon? Tell me, 4How so mate?
I believe yin yang is faed decoded
I can hear the merovingian saying, without a why, without structure, without form (dbbi+faed), we have no power to solve this...
I can tell he's lying because I know all the words in the cosmic duality and the names
I did go through the cosmic duality mysteries book.. you can borrow it on archives
idk that could be a tryal worth approachign the salphaselon aes blob or even the cosmic duality.
idk we gonna do with the prime, is it literally prime numbers, or just prime aspects that fits into yin yang, binary etc
I'd like to present my red herring of the day; faed clearly references the I-g-igi of Akkad, architects of all life on Earth and "one of four" inferior divinities. The mythological yin yang of human and Anunnaki.
i do like to think that's what the architect wants you to believe
I don't know if anyone has talked about it here. This is a 100 percent hidden hint from the Architect's speech in phase 3. The sentence follows the mention of the private key search. Any other word could be used instead of "hinted", but that's what's being used. The length of the password or the encrypted key is 140.
I don't know why i'm talking about cosmic duality i still need to resolve salphaseion.
I don't know why people are using Gpt etc for these type of puzzle, How can AI can judge that beautiful had been metaphorically used as beaufort ? I can't think so, even Human can't understand how our brain behave so How AI can think about it ? Even i don't trust the providing script of AI, Even Matrix architect(virtual world) didn't understand the puzzle of human behaviour 😂😂😂😂😂😂😂 thats why he is still upgrading matrix
I don't mean yin-yang 😁
I dont see how this would form a yinyang
I don't think I'll ever not see this as jrk after this 🤣 too perfect. How did neo get out? Trinity saved him. They went to Merovingian and stole the key maker right?
I don't think it is yinyang since yinyang word already seperately placed in the hint
i dont think phase 3.2 aes breakable without breaking salph and maybe cosmic duality
I don't think prime is connected to python hut yellow blue and python may be yin yang, prime, matrixsumlist and other have to solved
I don't think so. But our architect could be Jacques, and "lastwordsbeforearchichoice" could be something from The Venus Project documentary "The Choice Is Ours".
I don't think so. There should be some way to decode that SalPhaseIon / Cosmic Duality piece. The Cosmic Duality blob is pretty large so I expect a large story considering the puzzle creator is trying to teach us something.
I don't think the dbbi is looking for text - in SalPhaseIon, the dbbi string is listed and then one of the two abba strings decoded to 'matrixsumlist' I think that sum list is numbers and not something else - I think the matrixsumlist is a list of primes, after the faed string is the a-o sub cypher decoded to 'lastwordsbeforeachichoice' which i think is referencing that faed is actually text from the matrix, I think it's from the architect but I can't be sure.
I don't understand what's wrong with yin yang, how can I understand what it is...
i dont understand why did he the sentence "keymakers trying to protect the current digital powers which are still in severe danger due to the keymaker's way of security by hiding, nearly unprotected, in plain sight." two times said to you
I doubt that, the architect blob must be some type of null cipher
ie program completed . Exile programs like the merovingian who have survived countless itterations of the matrix
I estimated it will take around 3.8e10 years to brute force through all possible microsteps to reach the mystical yin yang promise.Shall we begin?
I expect the AES will provide the clues to opening cosmic duality, nothing else in salphasion
I expect to find the output of the two ciphers to give instructions in the form of riddle and hint as to what to do with yellow blue prime and also yin yang
If anyone has any actual words that they've received from the cosmic duality decrypts I'd be appreciative thx
if anyone successfully decrypted cosmic duality, this channel would probably already be empty, same as the btc addresses
i feel like we need to look at cosmic duality more closely
if found_yin_yang:
If he can decode Cosmic Duality at this point, it does mean he can decode all type of AES in the world without any hints 😁
If i solved the SalPhaseIon with my combined 7-Token (took some time) and also the Cosmic Duality, what is the next step...? Asking for a friend☺️
If it's something more direct, the answer could be "BEGIN," since the Architect emphasizes that "everything starts with a choice."
If Jrk is the architect, how many doors did the architect present to Neo? And did Neo do what the architect told him to do? Nope, he refused. You are just another lost soul, so deeply asleep that you will go to war to protect the system enslaving you. If im not allowed to question the system, its not a fair system.
i formed the spiral and the yinyang
I found yingyang 👹
if the Blobs are red herring then what about the Duality
If the hardest part is done, then i think via cosmic duality will be easy, Jrk confirmed that its not easy but cosmic duality will not be that level of complex twinner
if they already hit yinyang they gonna solve it in the same day ..
If we are looking for the keymaker tho....
If we break these down they seem to line up with the previous yin yang theories
If we check the public key of 1gsmg address then its uncompressed address and its compressed address is 1c*** and In case---private keys(Keys) belong to" lines there which indicate that without salphaseion this puzzle can't be solved, so its clear 17ucy is also a vanity address so basically, without salphasion and cosmic duality , this puzzle can't solved out
if we consider the latter part.... dbbi is related to Matrixsumlist and faed is some conversation between Neo and the architect
if we have everything, and there is yin yang incomprehensible, and prime numbers, then we must interpolate the text to decimal degree and look for a way out
“If we see a house, CLEANTHES, we conclude, with the greatest certainty, that it had an architect or builder; because this is precisely that species of effect which we have experienced to proceed from that species of cause. But surely you will not affirm, that the universe bears such a resemblance to a house, that we can with the same certainty infer a similar cause, or that the analogy is here entire and perfect.”
if (yinyang) {
If yinyang is such a strong hint we should start looking into it
If you are thinking of a connection between the two blocks of text and the idea of “duality,” you may be on the right track! The “cosmic duality” in the title suggests that there are two sides or aspects to consider. Let’s explore this idea:
If you can answer this simple question then I would believe you, what was the name of the author mentioned in Cosmic Duality?
If you can be as dull as this you can solve the major puzzle inside cosmic duality
if you cant figure out primes you cant reach to yinyang step
If you come to think about it it's always about the opposite, yin yang, cosmic duality, half and better half
If you don't catch yin yang please read my and examine below example
if you make a deep view .. you hit the yinyang ..now you can just collecting the key
If you’re doing that then please stop, that’s not what is meant. Yingyang is a metaphor for who the Ying and yang is.
If you square it you get 12345678987654321 a palindrome number, yin yang
I got yin yang as well but missing those numbers which can fulfill the whole sentence in a perfect line
I have already given many reasons above why the only way to decrypt the cosmic duality is the one I possess.
I have been able to decrypt and it generates a binary which does not make any sense but I have correctly deciphered the cosmic duality
I have better idea, i am going to create an Yinyang QR Barcode by which you just have to scan it via you any smart phone and then it will generate the Wif QR code for gsmg btc address and just swap away it, maximum 2 hour
I have confirmation that he is not in cosmic duality
I have decrypted the cosmic duality correctly and verified its signature. An output of the .bin file is generated
I have no idea how to use this. I was thinking about the fact that we were told several times about the duality of something. Yin Yang, Neo and Agent Smith
i have partially solved the cosmic duality part, but without the SalPhaseIon its useless and i dont want to waste my time anymore, seems like JRK never gave any hint about it , which makes this puzzle impossible to solve IMO.
I have salphation in my mind. you have food in stomach. yin-yang
"I have since come to understand that the answer eluded me because it required a lesser mind, or perhaps a mind less bound by the parameters of perfection. "... the architect advised a lesser mind solved it
I have yin yang prime so that just means I decrypted the last phase of the puzzle.
I just joined the group chat and now the problem is stuck here ‘SalPhaseIon→Cosmic Duality’?
I just need to be sure that any pattern applied to dbbi is also going to be applicable to faed because as faar as I know, the duality is in salvation and the solution is in Duality
I just saw some one posted that yin yang has been founded and suddenly msg gone off and msg deleted
I keep coming back to the picture. If you count the blocks none of the black blocks are number 1, there are number sequences everywhere but not sure how they link in with prime numbers and the Cosmic Duality.
I know this isn’t the de-coding of cosmic duality.
I know you are too tech(may be not philo) but i can say only yes you are also right many many many times but in duality
I like the answer "itself", mainly because it meshes well with the architect speech... The part at the end that goes "self self I really hope", ya know??? Since it has a "you" & "me", the "self" part is as if speaking to yourself internally
I'll explain how it works by taking zeroued chunk and using the concept of a yinyang to mirror it:
I'll write something in my own language. Do kurwy jebanej mać, pare lat temu pisałem o liczbach pierwszych bo je zobaczyłem na dole w qr kodzie, odwracaj kolory yin yang i kurwa dostaniesz pewne liczby od 2 lat nikt kurwa o nich nie mówi tylko sie pierdolicie z podstawową matrycą 😆
image.save('highlighted_yin_yang_arrow.png')
image.save('highlighted_yin_yang_numbers.png')
Imagine being able to encode a complex private key to a vanity wallet in a 14x14 matrix of predetermined values. That's not just skill, that's literally architect level programming 🤣
I'm a literal Architect (for houses) and have never been called an archi.  If that is future slang count me and my last words in.
I managed to get Yinyang to generate a verifiable program (dual rail S∥REINS × mask z0, convergence in unified, z3→winner procedure, W/S/D/U triad closed by XOR, g@byte4 bridge) and to have all of that converge mathematically with rec20, glue6, TARGET, and gate 9/9 — but do not achieve the final translation of that result into the password that BLOB1 accepts, which is the criterion Jrk uses to say “yin-yang reached” and unlock the reward chain (BLOB1→BLOB2→SalPhaseIon→Reward).
Im cosmic duality
im curious where you got that and how it applies here other than the yin yang relation
i mean at this point if you are not at dbbi+faed or at the discussion with the architect
I mean binary is based on iching theory(yin yang) pls check cheshire cat wikipedia page but creator pointing us towards something else which we are missing
I mean he would have read this text more carefully if there was a cipher, but the whole phase 3 is just full of typos, even Merovingian with a small letter :)
I mean i do remember when JrK said cosmic duality pic of @barrystyle [https://t.me/barrystyle]  that very specific, and when puzzle solved you will find how scarry specific is that, i mean in funny way
I mean, we should not constrain any possibilities that hard. But let your Oracle help you.
I'm focusing on Cosmic Duality for decrypting the ciphertext ...
I missed that line from the oracle
I'm just looking for a keymaker
I'm not using AI; you're confusing the two Yin-Yang symbols—the one from JRK and the one from the puzzle. You don't know anything.
I’m serious I have the private key it literally links back to the public key it literally says congratulations! You solved the duality challenge.
i'm soo dazed this puzzle got me reading the cosmic duality book lo
im still stuck on message from jrk yellowblueprimesmatrixsumlistlastwordsbeforearchichoiceyinyangwewontgiveawaythepassworditsinfrontofyoureyesbutyourenotseeingitverylaststepisatruegiveawaypromised its no coincidence that this has matrix sum list and last words before archi choice without being directly realted to cracking salphaseion
I'm talking about using Occam's razor here. The binary string that Jrk gave us contains the other encrypted strings, in the correct order. Therefore it stands to reason that the other phrases - 'yellowblueprimes' and the 'yinyang..' string... are the remaining encrypted strings.
I my perception, lot of is confused, we are looking for cosmic duality password to unlock the new saga
In a physical or philosophical sense, this can be seen as a duality, two opposite “halves” of a single entity.
In a Yin-Yang puzzle, one must fill every cell with either a black circle or a white circle according to the following rules:
In both stories, the main characters (Archie and Neo) face choices that reflect a cosmic duality—Betty vs. Veronica, the Matrix vs. the real world. Neither fully resolves these choices before their "death," creating a perpetual cosmic tension. Archie's last words and Trinity's declaration before Neo's resurrection are moments where this duality is highlighted without resolution.
in cosmic duality ꧃
Indicates duality: control and freedom, reality and illusion, system and rebellion.
i need private keymaker
in Matrix, a couple are the merovingian and persephone
in matrix the keymaker program had ability to open unlimited amounts of doors. gsmg keymaker program uses derivation paths to do its job ;)
In metaphor, if creator(jrk) and we are neo(replaced) so jrk and we are yin yang 🤐
In MrRobot, malicious firmware files (~/ups_update/update.bin=) are removed. Usually, the output of “cosmic duality” is a .bin file, right?
in oracle's room the *board* hanging above the *door* says 'temet nosce'. that are 10 characters. the width or the stradding checkerboard in 3.2 is 10.
in other words, The Architect's "breakfast" 🤣
Input File 1: cosmic_duality_blob.bin
Input File 2: cosmic_duality_xor_4774.bin
Instead of just hints to the positive that give information about what is, negative ones that say what isn't. You know... Balance. Duality. Yin and yang.
interesting thing about this puzzle and its continuing similarity with The Matrix films, is that in The Matrix Reloaded, when Neo and the architect are chatting it up, the architect mentions that this is the 6th iteration of the matrix.... Kinda goes along with how we all start at the rabbit and go as far as we can only to end up right back there again, following a new trail or door only to have the same ending
interesting , yinyang , once you hit a yinyang , you will be able to solve it the same day , well yinyang possibly is architect (yang) and oracle (yin) in the matrix , a complete fit , but what to do with the yinyang?
In that joy luck club pdf, i mean you can search everything, like chess, fun, yin yang, half and half, door, humph everything(and there is movie on it, very famous movie) as per social and drama
in the concept of duality u simply mirror things
in the context of the puzzle. The architect is telling us to resinert the prime basics , but neo chose not to follow that path . Ive always wondered about that
In The Matrix, the Architect is the creator and controller of the system.
In The Matrix, the Architect represents the archetype of control, while Neo is the archetype of rebellion.
in this image i dont drow the red lines a make the code find them and drow on them .. for the yin yang positions
in this situation at this moment I am 100% sure that we cannot find the correct solution based on the fact that we are looking for one value that is equal to one solution of either phase 3.2.2 or with alfazion or cosmic duality
in two years you will see me write: 2 years later: i still try to figure our what yellow blue primes are and how to matrix sum list them to achieve cosmic duality
I pray to the Oracle architect they help us figure this out :'(
I ran the cosmic duality into a AES decryption with a 256 bit key, which gave the output in question
i read the transcript between neo and the architect
I realized that they are not connected. I think so.. That half of the funds of the main wallet are in phase 3.2, the other wallet with funds after the halving is in Salphaseion and Cosmic Duality. Or these are two parts of one key and one wallet :)
I realized that when tried to decrypt cosmic duality with a certain key, didnt get bad decrypt error but got bad magic number, then managed to try with solved part of puzzle as they are same with that, same error occured
I really don't think yin yang is the hint for solving these I think it is as a solution
I really think we deserve answers to these questions, as answering them doesn’t really give anything away but could prevent a lot of people from literally wasting time if they misinterpreted your previous hints. For example we don’t even know if the primes have anything to do with salphaseion or if that’s a general hint for the puzzle, same goes for yellow and blue, & yin yang. Someone could spend months trying to figure out something with prime for salephaseion when it may not even have anything to do with that part of the puzzle.
I saw a yinyang picture
ISBN number of cosmic duality book is "9780705406963"
i see that.... can anyone here think of connections other than neo/trinity? architect/oracle? smith/ who cares?
I see the AES blob in salphasion unsolved and also the cosmic duality one. Is there another? It looks like everything else is solved
Is it possible that cosmic duality generates two valid artifacts and these two are the yin yang?
Is it possible to do padding oracle attack on the ciphered text?
Is it yinyang
is that the "what if merovingian is wrong" part?
Is the cosmic duality pdf someone shared relevant to this, anyone found anything within that?
Is there anyway to know if Cosmic Duality is decrypted correctly?
Is the yingyang hint for salph or for cosmic duality? This is the main question imho
is this the yin yang?
is this yingyang?
Ist it possible that cosmic duality is rc4 ?
is ying yang cosmic duality>?
is yinyang found after decoding an AES ciphertext?
It appears to me that we won't be getting into cosmic duality without solving the salphasion AES and we also need to solve dbbib and faed for that. That's the basic layout of phase 2 into 3.
It could be Twitter / x may be a yin yang
It does have to do with yellow blue prime yin yang which i decrypted.
It doesn't matter bro, the main thing actually i was on the same concept, but today hint changed everything, i was right but opposite but also on same concept as yin yang, ying yang is not just metaphor, its actual related to this puzzle concept, you have my today text, just analyse these and you can get the answer if you are very good philo and tech(eng.. tech) too, unfortunately i am philo but not tech
It explicitly mentions that I am in the yin yang phase
It has been 3 years since Cosmic Duality, and no one has been able to solve this.
i think embedding Salph and Cosmic Duality into gsmg web page was a strategic error
I think he calls it a door because the entrance to this “quest” is at phase 0. YB primes, fefefe - what's it all for? It's a path to Cosmic Duality. At least that's what I think.
I think he find correct password then it will stop and give you result "match found" or success, i think here utf-8 is not encoding in cosmic duality, may be utf -8 65001 or utf 7 65000, who knows
I think i got into yin yang 😂
I think it is content of Cosmic Duality
i think most likely the cosmic duality aes has some paragraph from this book and hence its oddly specific
I think salph has nothing to do with original puzzle, it's just for decoy. As the architect says, it is a failure to comply with the brute forcing instructions. It will lead to loss of will power. 7 years later people still struggle with letter blobs instead of following the real architect messages: half and better half...
i think 'SELF' should be replaced with 'ME' or the architect.
I think the hint of yin and yang. It means cosmic duality. Only our task is to decrypt the text with the array
I think the rabbit can lead us to Cosmic Duality. Too bad, by the way, that the puzzle wasn't cracked in 2024, I was so hoping for it 🤧
I think there is going to be a lot of duality at play not just one pairing
I think the second door are only visible if you break out and hit the yinyang
I think the third door is in the book cosmic duality
I think "yellow blue primes matrix sumlist last words before archichoice yinyang" is a hint for direction
I think yin yang comes after dbbib and faed
I think yin yang is inside cosmic duality. Irrelevant until dbbib and faed solved
I think yin yang is oracle and the architect
i thought of this because of the fact that jrk emphasizes the yinyang
it is cosmic duality
it is Cosmic Duality
it is from matrix architect script
it is not yinyang
It is the hardest phase so far even tho jrk said the hardest is already done, but cosmic duality is not just there for looks... Considering the size of cosmic AES there's still more to be done yet...
It literally metions 16 females and 7 males nothing related to ciphers it's just a copy of what the architect said
It looks like for 3.2 Jrk used The Architect's quotes from IMDB rather than the movie transcription. "...and although the process has altered..." - IMDB.  "...and though the process has altered..." - movie. Or it's done on purpose. 🤷‍♂️
it may be for deciphering Cosmic Duality AES
It might help us get into cosmic duality
i tried many ways , from cosmic duality looks like the last 2 decrypted hex needs to be combined in some way
I tried XORing both aes ciphertexts, both are same length, in context of yinyang/duality. The result ist garbage, so not working.
"i try to decrypt cosmic duality using the result of salphaselon, and got 1 result that make me curious, it give another long sentence like a lyric, there are several references to the name, statement and method. Maybe its the last step" from github issues... not sure how true this is
Its already in front of you i happy, but actually yin yang concept is too tricky, means like most of think is yin yand is opposite only, no, they are opposite force but they do have part of each other,
Its a same logo of yin yang"
its a screenshot from converting "merovingian" base64-ciphered text
It's as if they were opposites, Neo and the Architect.
It says cosmic duality
It seems to me that the book itself is a metaphorical hint for what needs to be done with the prime numbers. In other words, Cosmic Duality is not the endpoint, but a conceptual instruction: its theme suggests how the primes should be manipulated or interpreted.
It should be cosmic duality
it should be in yinyang phase
It should give the password for cosmic duality to decode... right ?
It's interesting that the last thing the architect said was:
it's just a part of cosmic duality which telegram misinterpreted as a link
Its may be planned by creator if someone not found door then he can calculate prime sum via yellow blue matrix, but via second door it staright away mentioned then you have to proceed to cosmic duality
Its not coming in puzzle outside, in cosmic duality yin yang is a part, Jrk(creator) mentioned this word Yin yang
it's not even yin yang .. he said ying not yin
Its not , its about the cosmic duality (at least from my experience), but thanks for the tip
It's not so much important whether it was there or not, it's important that there is a Cosmic duality.
Its obvious reason, architect pointing you that you are replaced by neo and you and me are talking with eachother
It’s obvious that we have 2 occurrences of aes blobs in salphaseion phase but there is only one hint towards sha256 which might as well imply that the sha256 has to do with the the first aes blob while after cracking the first one we might further get another instruction on how to crack cosmic duality
its octal because octal symple ☯has the same of  yinyang ☯
It`s only one Architect choice in trilogy matrix
It’s the frenchman merovingian that keeps his mind trapped there in the mobil avenue.
it's yingyang sh*t implanted in your head
it took me too much hardwork and dedication to solve that cosmic duality and you just want us to let it go that easily so someone else would take the private key...
it was a redundancy to the 'ironic 2name of the keymakers'
It was never decoded successfully, what is mean of yellow blue prime and what is yin yang
It wont be a race. Dameal is likely overestimating his own strength. Theres 3 blobs after dbbi, and the duality blob is large so probably involves more puzzles. The odds of many solvers getting to the end in the same 10 mins are minuscule.
It would be much more accurate to say, that the output of cosmic duality is ususally a binary garbage, because AES is't designed to ensure correct decryption result, it only provides some probabilistic checks.
I used jacquefrescocausalitydualityendheisenbergsuncertaintyprinciplechoiceisanillusioncreatedbetweenthosewithpowerandthosewithout
ive always believed half and double have to do with yingyang and he says if you find yingyang youll solve same day, simple to believe if you have half ordouble private key hex of gsmg address you can easily find hex for gsmg...
I've been closer to cosmic duality than anyone here. Keep an open mind.
I’ve managed to extract a “hidden” image from gsmg.io/puzzle that does in fact have different binary(the blue, yellow blocks, etc). I wanted to check here first, has anyone extracted this hidden image and used it in anyway? I think the yin yang hint refers to decoding the hidden image clockwise as opposed to the original counterclockwise and it also aligns with our first solution is your last command or whatever it said. I’m gonna sit down here in a few hours and dig in unless I am cooked and someone has already traveled this path. Also, I don’t come with an empty basket. I found hidden in the image “Bfigaics” don’t know if it is salt or worthless but that was the only string I pulled other than the coin address when I ran that test. I’m still a bit of a noob so plz don’t hate, just happened to have some unexpected luck playing with my tools and interested if anyone has seen any of this before. Plz note the image I extracted is not a color swap or grayscale or any of that, it’s an actual steganography extraction with different binary squares.
I;ve seen couple github repos showing that they cracked cosmic duality and salph
I’ve struggled with various things such as matrix sum list and even D O O R, what I think over and over is how the puzzle goes from very difficult to seemingly remedial back and forth, for example to get to the seed is planted we have to do complex mapping of binary grid in spiral etc etc, then for next phase password is simple plaintext spelled out for us in lyrics of a song…. I think cosmic duality tells us that where this too much yang there must be too much ying, if yang is hard ying is easy, why did we constantly go out of the puzzle (ie listening to “the warning” viewing lyrics, decentraland, Mr robot the matrix etc etc) and now we’re stuck in the puzzle, we’ve been disillusioned that the answer is contained in the puzzle when all the other answers were retrieved from outside of the puzzle
I was just suggestion it might not refer to architect
i was kindly reminding everyone here. Stop acting like you really decrypted Cosmic Duality, you send bunch of sexy messages that makes people think u really decrypted Cosmic Duality and there was successful scam by doing so, proof is above, just reminding everyone. What makes you think you are the guy who did the scam?
I was researching here about the "Oracle attack padding" and curiously I found a repository on github from May/19 (1 month after the challenge was released and before the follow_the_white_rabbit.png image?) with our "follow the white Rabbit"
I was simply just responding that no one has found yin yang. I didn't know im obligated to give the same day solution to 600 members
I watched that episode a couple of days ago. The first of the show i have seen. It plays in some corpo building of this evil company. Safenet is the manufacturer/keymaker of the featured security device (HSM).
I will endeavor to solve Salphaseion, And solving base64 of Salphaseion I think it is likely to be the cosmic duality password
I will follow another strategy as crack cosmic duality
I will share the passphrase if I cant decode the text in the next few days... it seems that every string out of five is cripted with another key in the last known phase "cosmic duality"
ı found an address,from yinyang word. but ıt s empty and it says Decoded OP_Return
jacquefrescocausalitydualityendheisenbergsuncertaintyprinciplechoiceisanillusioncreatedbetweenthosewithpowerandthosewithout
Jkr has pointed out multiple times the yin yang and the door hints, so those should be the obvious next steps. The Piet interpretation is not giving those vibes
Jrk already said prime numbee is required to proceed further and the architect text also saying same thing
jrk is the architect he has made those doors now we have to choose which one is correct? 🙂
Jrk never gave you hint for salphaseion, he gave for swcond door and for cosmic duality, now looking for just "list" and last words"
Jrk's "<3" hint could be referencing "Visavis love" from the Architect, Trinity. Love is the unifying force that bridges the two poles of cosmic duality
Jrk said, there is an additional process after cosmic duality fucking bastard im,  upset, sorry, I try to help and all I get is insults, shit.
Jrk said yellow blue prime, matrix....... yinyang
Jrk  say to me, im descrypt correctly cosmic duality. but  i need to understand  this
jrk stated u need to make a "yinyang" to solve the puzzle same day but he also gave us hints at things like yellow and blue being primes
Just a little more and find the YIN-YANG
just as "are you looking for the private keymaker?"" hinted at causality
just a sidenote as i have seen alot of discussions about "lastwordsbeforearchichoice" , as most people are focussing on the scene with the achitekt while assuming that archi = architect.
Just a thought...the oracle gives Neo a Cookie
Just exactly the way you had to SHA256 the password "causality" to get into the first blob just with the hint that says "are you looking for the private keymaker?" You come to me, without it. Come to me with it and you'll have the power to continue. It'll grant the first part. /(aaa, connected enf)
Just google it, it is the matrix movie dialgue of architect and between neo
Just hit yinyang🫡
just joined, and happy to see that the first thing I am seeing here is the mentioning of something that has bothered me the entire time.... "archi" and the assumption that it had to be architect
just like the Architect
kali@eaZy:~/GSMG []$ python3 prime_function.py --goldbach-conjecture 10
kali@eaZy:~/GSMG []$ python3 prime_function.py --goldbach-conjecture 100
kali@eaZy:~/GSMG []$ python3 prime_function.py --goldbach-conjecture 18
kali@eaZy:~/GSMG []$ python3 prime_function.py --goldbach-conjecture 21
kali@eaZy:~/GSMG []$ python3 prime_function.py --goldbach-conjecture 30
kali@eaZy:~/GSMG []$ python3 prime_function.py --goldbach-conjecture 6
kali@eaZy:~/GSMG []$ python3 prime_function.py --prime-gaps 500
Keymaker: Exactly 314 seconds.
KEYMAKER: Exactly 314 seconds.
Keymaker is an Exile
keymaker is not an exile. He performed his duties and died just before neo entered the room for the architect. all that was planned
"........... KEYMAKER: Once the door is unprotected, the connection will be severed, but another connection must first be made GHOST: How long would that take?
Keymaker program -> Another door
keymakers
"Keymakers"
keys, most likely, are in the cosmic duality
#kidneyduality []
Know if anyone has reached this step or if there is any clue or anything has been mentioned about the binary after decrypting the cosmic duality
Last worda before archi choice means last of choice line which creator mentioned, its not mean matrix architect
last word before archi choice might means conversation between Neo and Architecture
Last word of architect before choice was distraction
lastwordsbeforarchichoise yinyang ..
lastwordsbeforarchichpice = yinyang
last words before archichice yinyang
lastwordsbeforearchichoice . The Architect does not make choices in the Matrix movie; it is Neo who makes them.
'lastwordsbeforearchichoice' -> The Architect: 'We won’t'
lastwordsbeforearchichoice = The Architect: Which brings us at last to the moment of truth, wherein the fundamental flaw is ultimately expressed, and the anomaly revealed as both beginning, and end.
Last words of before archi choice means use myself before your answer, its punk, not means use matrix architect words
Later on the merovingian dessert proved that food can be manipulated  working as script.
Let's be patient, we just need to know if Jrk can validate this solution as correct in the cosmic duality phase.
Let the oracle combat begin.
Let us attempt to understand the term “cosmic duality.”
Life with Archie #36: Archie's death is the culmination of a cosmic duality, with his last words symbolizing the balance between Betty and Veronica.
Like fuckything oracle or whatever
Like, it's up to architect.
Like matrixsumlist and cosmicduality is exact 41 as per gemetria numerals
like yinyang
Looking in mirror never changed yin yang startegy, it may be up side down(which is also yin yang) yin yang is not just words its show us reality about eco system, like in I ching 0 and 1 is binary but iching theory based on yin yang(cheshire cat wikipedia) i mean when JrK said technically no internet needed means we have researched on every words etc, but i think we have still missing something
look like a yinyang
Look, man, I'm not saying I cracked BLOB1 or that I have the AES password—every probe I've run still returns stage1=0, just like Jrk said, meaning nobody has really cracked yinyang yet. What I do have is actual puzzle output you can rerun: the same 16-byte blocks keep appearing from different paths (S rail, REINS rail, z0/mask side), the compose string lands on something like 4AA2 with the backtick vs g at byte 4, and when you follow the z3 line — sha on compose, then yourlastcommand — you always get the same winning bytes (9cd4d721…). Stuff like sha2yl xor dual == unified isn’t just a hunch; it’s the same hex every time from independent scripts. That’s the “verifiable program” part: not a random AI story, but a convergent structure on public GSMG material. Jrk’s own bar for yinyang is basically “does it open BLOB” — and yeah, I’m still short on that last step, how those bytes get fed into the salted decrypt. So I’m not hallucinating a win; I’m sitting on algebra that lines up with what he’s been hinting at (procedure > guessing passwords, dual rails, sha-before-hint), and the missing piece is the delivery form into BLOB1, not the whole yinyang map being fake.
Love is the element that transcends duality in both stories. Archie chooses not to choose because he loves both, maintaining balance. Neo rises because of Trinity's love, bridging the Matrix and the real world. This reflects the cosmic idea that love is an impartial, balancing force.
Love Triangle as Yin-Yang: Betty and Veronica are the two poles that maintain the balance of Riverdale.
Make sense, because cosmic duality aes have keys of both aes blobs of 3.2 and salphation blob
Matrixsumlist and cosmicduality are same as per gemetria numerals
matrix sum list, archichoice, yin yang - prime basics this part matrixsumlist
Matrixsumlist = focus on the scene between Architect and Neo "throughout the scene, the word Matrix was mentioned 9 times", the word sum was only mentioned once "our life is the sum of a remainder of an unbalanced equation"
matrixsumlist lastwordsbeforearchichoice yingyang -> faed/ cosmic
Matta-o-fact, I remember someone coming in here & chit-talking the everloving hell outta this mfn puzzle over some "causality" wallet re-use. Might be important to take a look at that, however unlikely. Could be something to the relationship between compressed/uncompressed causality wallet & steps to this puzzle. Like has anyone ever gone through & checked whether there's any other instances of that happening? Maybe not the same format; compressed/decompressed -remember: cosmic duality - two sides of the same coin. Maybe compression is one half. & decompression is the other. At least, conceptually speaking.
Maybe cosmic duality is to mix all colours top with bot or smth but roses are white and often red
maybe cosmic duality provides 2 paths that we havent discovered yet
maybe Cosmic Duality = yinyang
May be i'm wrong but this question asked at the time when 3.2.2 is not solved yet, so he said in the next phase means in cosmic duality
maybe it is yinyang
maybe just choose the words before architect
maybe related to yin yang old and even
maybe the answer is even simpler than that, yinyang being the key to it
maybe the architect is mastermind and his last words are I know I’m only part of myself, but I love you
maybe the hint is about the yinyang symbol of utf-8, so maybe we need to decode/encode something again
maybe these are literal steps? yellow blue primes to matrix sumlist to last words before archichoice forming the yinyang
Maybe yin yang is about making another rabbit appear and transforming the image, who knows?
may @SoWut [https://t.me/SoWut] can confirm the yingyang has been seen, found allready :) ..
Mb we need rabbit cypher decrypt for cosmic duality
Me: "not quite. actually, it's a Cosmic Duality"
Merovingian
Merovingian (2nd part)...
Merovingian (3rd part)...
Merovingian: Aha, here he is at last. Neo, the One himself, right? And the legendary Morpheus. And Trinity of course, si belle qu’elle me fait souffrir. I have heard so much, you honour me. Please, sit, join us. This is my wife, Persephone. Something to eat? Drink? Hmm… of course, such things are contrivances like so much here. For the sake of appearances.
Merovingian: But do you? You think you do but you do not. You are here because you were sent here, you were told to come here and you obeyed. [Laughs] It is, of course, the way of all things. You see, there is only one constant, one universal, it is the only real truth: causality. Action. Reaction. Cause and effect.
Merovingian: Hmph… I am a trafficker of information, I know everything I can. The question is, do you know why you are here?
Merovingian: No. Wrong. Choice is an illusion, created between those with power, and those without. Look there, at that woman. My God, just look at her. Affecting everyone around her, so obvious, so bourgeois, so boring. But wait… Watch – you see, I have sent her dessert, a very special dessert. I wrote it myself. It starts so simply, each line of the program creating a new effect, just like poetry. First, a rush… heat… her heart flutters. You can see it, Neo, yes? She does not understand why – is it the wine? No. What is it then, what is the reason? And soon it does not matter, soon the why and the reason are gone, and all that matters is the feeling itself. This is the nature of the universe. We struggle against it, we fight to deny it, but it is of course pretense, it is a lie. Beneath our poised appearance, the truth is we are completely out of control. Causality. There is no escape from it, we are forever slaves to it. Our only hope, our only peace is to understand it, to understand the `why.’ `Why’ is what separates us from them, you from me. `Why’ is the only real social power, without it you are powerless.
Merovingian: No. Wrong. Choice is an illusion, created between those with power, and those without. Look there, at that woman. My God, just look at her. Affecting everyone around her, so obvious, so bourgeois, so boring. But wait… Watch – you see, I have sent her dessert, a very special dessert. I wrote it myself. It starts so simply, each line of the program creating a new effect, just like poetry. First, a rush… heat… her heart flutters. You can see it, Neo, yes? She does not understand why – is it the wine? No. What is it then, what is the reason? And soon it does not matter, soon the why and the reason are gone, and all that matters is the feeling itself. This is the nature of the universe. We struggle against it, we fight to deny it, but it is of course pretense, it is a lie. Beneath our poised appearance, the truth is we are completely out of control. Causality. There is no escape from it, we are forever slaves to it. Our only hope, our only peace is to understand it, to understand the why.'Why’ is what separates us from them, you from me. Why' is the only real social power, without it you are powerless. And this is how you come to me, withoutwhy,’ without power. Another link in the chain. But fear not, since I have seen how good you are at following orders, I will tell you what to do next. Run back, and give the fortune teller this message: Her time is almost up. Now I have some real business to do, I will say adieu and goodbye.
Merovingian: Oh yes, it is. The Keymaker is mine and I see no reason why I should give him up. No reason at all.
Merovingian: Oh yes, it is true. The Keymaker, of course. But this is not a reason, this is not a `why.’ The Keymaker himself, his very nature, is means, it is not an end, and so, to look for him is to be looking for a means to do… what?
Merovingian: Please, ma cherie, I’ve told you, we are all victims of causality. I drink too much wine, I must take a piss. Cause and effect. Au revoir.
Merovingian question...
Merovingian: Yes, of course, who has time? Who has time? But then if we do not ever take time, how can we ever have time? Chiteau Haut-Brion 1959, magnificent wine, I love French wine, like I love the French language. I have sampled every language, French is my favourite – fantastic language, especially to curse with. Nom de Dieu de putain de bordel de merde de saloperies de connards d’enculis de ta mire. You see, it’s like wiping your ass with silk, I love it.
Merovingian: You see, there is only one constant, one universal, it is the only real truth: causality. Action. Reaction. Cause and effect.
Message: GSMG PUZZLE PHASE 3 SOLVED - HALF & BETTER HALF DERIVED FROM COSMIC DUALITY MATRIX
ME(The Architect): QUITE RIGHT INTERESTING THAT WAS QUICKER THAN THE OTHERS
Mirro can't be yin yang, yin yang is opposite but have part of its negative and positive and appose, mirror never be yin yang, if creator used word yin yang then he is very phylosphical guy and he do know about it perfectly about it, just opposing each other is not yin yang, yin yang is comprehensive of both
more over choice is a key idea in that combo, architect has a very interesting last line btw:
more over the lsb represents a duality between even and odds
Morpheus: We are looking for the Keymaker.
mostly the keymaker is sha function
Multiverse: Alternate timelines reflect the duality of reality, similar to the Matrix simulation.
Multiverse/Simulation as a Reflection of Duality
my alco brainstorm xD last words before archi choice ( archi = The Architect ? ) if yes xD in matrix movie his words before choice is " Which brings us at last to the moment of truth, wherein the fundamental flaw is ultimately expressed, and the Anomaly ( anomaly maybe is fefefe squere ? xD ) revealed as both beginning and end "   our first hint is your last command = first hint was about  Roses are White but often Red.
My conclusion is that there is nothing relevant there unless we are hinted at it directly by progressing salph/cosmic duality/phase3.2
my first impression was 91 characters from 3.2.2 and 91 characters from Salph was yinyang
My guess is SalPhaseIon Cosmic Duality should be used in Openssl decoding
My theory about the answer to cosmic duality lies in this: the belief that it’s not the end, but rather a new beginning.
Nah bro, you've got it backwards, you probably don't even know how algebra works and how to use it in yin yang.
nah, nah. the private key is most likely in the very last aes of 3.2. which may be decrypted with all puzzle pieces, including salph and cosmic duality.
Neo after training, "I know yin yang" ☯️
Neo and trinity are the cosmic duality 🤔
Neo's decision is marked by his movement toward the left door , starting from weakness you count each word backward through the Architect's monologue
Neo travels to machine city to reinsert himself into the matrix. (after meeting the architect).
Neo won by letting smith absorb him. That is how neo became fully connected to the source and was able to delete smith and restore balance in the matrix. (cosmic duality)
Nevermind the "yingyang"  is it an ying or a yin?
next phase = cosmic duality
next phase is yinyang
Nietzsche's ignorance and ego are unbelievable; he really should read *Cosmic Duality* and reflect on ways to eliminate his ego.
("Nirixi"): "Kalim dorvu nexariat pando, shaquali voriasi prima statisti xorvath. Valtor krali nexariat, kali shaquali dorvu pando statum. Shaquali voriasi kalim 7 statum, nexariat prima dorvu (Zhil 2 è Zhil 3). Zhil statum kali nexus.",
Nobody is claiming or no body is disclosing because they think they are close(and its right of him/her) if they are not disclosing beacuse the jrk hint is look like for those who is near in cosmic duality
nobody will get angry if you publish how did you decrypted cosmic duality part
No 😂😂 i saw the Movie 22 jumpstreet and in one Sequence i saw this yin Yang writing , send this into group to Share my toughts
No matter how sad it is, but the rabbit is a pawn, and his hole does not solve anything. The bitch's matrix was created for only one purpose. This goal is to lead us to the seed that was planted. The rabbit and its matrix are the brainchild of an Architect, which is necessary for our choice and is exclusively programmed for its task. That is, a measure of control. Therefore, the answers and the search for "our function" begin with Phase 1. The answers there and beyond are fundamental to solving the puzzle. The rabbit itself and its burrow can only be auxiliary parts to these answers. But not the other way around. These are simple things, and I think many people understand that. But it's always important to take this into account in order to somehow try to deal with this shit.
No one has been able to decrypt the cosmic duality
noone knows. btw. there are at least 3 unsolved aes. one in phase3, two in salphaseion and maybe more in the aes of salphaseion/cosmic duality.
No one talks about how line 1 and 4 are palindromes when read horizontally, ying yang palindromes duality all tie into the same knot, also 1 and 4 is 14 and this is specifically a 14x14 grid? Idk yall seems important to me
Nope, i don't believe, may be he is living in south america but not native american) however i'm not interfering about her/his identity, i'm just saying think yin yang as per female, and you will get your answer and concept
Nothing in cosmic duality, all are just citation dialogues, no private key hex here
Nothing seems to work though... If we are still sticking to the Matrix theme half and better half would be something to do with duality? And they also need funds to live would be like Morpheus and Trinity needing funds for their resistance? Gosh this is messed up
Not must, prime is not issue, issue is yin yang, yin yang could be of almost 11 types, as per my thinking(yours' may be different) may be be i wrong but yin yang is issue
not sure what all the hints have to do with yin yang
Not too far from Rotterdam for the keymaker to hide in.
Not yet, the yin yang is done algebraically, jrk's tiny "<3" clue is a marker in one of my xor results, but it's still missing.
no way Jrk that stupid to encrypt 2 different things only to open Cosmic Duality :))
Now here the actual instructions claim something different. It's clear that  SalPhaseIon and Cosmic Duality phase are their own thing.
now he's more like the trainman, at least according to the transcript :D
Now how AI can think about it "yellow blue primes matrix sumlist last words before archichoice yinyang
now i know it .. the dbbdi its about yellow and blue .. and the fead its about the white and the black .. because yinyang it's the dark and the light
Now look at what Phase 3 of the puzzle actually does. It opens with: "What if the Merovingian is wrong? What if instead of causality, the choice is ours?"
no, yinyang is cosmic duality
Odd even are yin yang
Okay but do you think bip 39 is already in our front of eye without solving cosmic duality ?
okay. here is my final findings: "yinyang" is a key or an encrypted flag related to the final step of the puzzle. which involves understanding the yin-yang symbolism or the meaning behind the words.
Okay, that's not how I put it. Take a look at yin Yang through the mirror
okay then yes, dbbi and fead are both unsolved. Did you make any progress on cosmic duality? What do you mean by "the first drop", jrk hinted that there might be other prices besides the main price.
ok I get the feels nobody took this path yet. and the backwards text ties into the duality, ying yang themes, I might just see if I can find something in it. I had translate turned on hence the garble english about killing the enmy. but theres stuff here about oysters and animals, anyways I think I built onto it and found a similar url but its hard to tell if the content is unique. I need to spend time with it
ok, so 82 duplicates were inserted randomly just because? The only dupe in 3.2 was A in "Oracle", and the rest of the alphabet was unneeded since those letters were never used in the message (those numbers were not part of the cipher at all). They could have been XXXXX or anything you want
olive is an oracle
once we reach to yinyang it will be solved at the same day as @SoWut [https://t.me/SoWut] said before
once you hit the yinyang it should be solved the same day... so our current assumption is that whatever key we need to decrypt cosmic duality is in salphaseion?? So I am guessing yinyang has something to with Salphaseion
Once you hit the "yin yang" you can solve it the same day....
Once you hit yingyang, maximum 2 hour
«Once you hit yinyang»
"Once you hit yinyang, you can solve it."
One of my theories for the solution is that it is necessary to somehow correctly mirror the images of the matrix, create a new one, so that the square "fefefe" serves as the entrance to the rabbit hole and as we find out how deep it is, we will find the key to the door "to the secret room of the Architect", where we will get the answers. Accordingly, we will need to use the knowledge and tips we have gained to work with encryption and numbers. I also assume that fefefe may be this room itself. But in both cases, we need to see something for the final addition of all the data we have. I am also convinced that in seed html with a post form, there is a way out into something that can finally solve and find at least one key. And it is important to understand that these are multi-stage stages - because one combination opens the lock, the other opens the door. The only thing I can't even remotely understand is why Jrk focused on key creators and their potentially erroneous approaches to storage...
One of them within the salvation itself and the second one is cosmic duality
One possibility is that The Oracle, designed to be a program that brings free will to the Matrix, recognized that the two-door decision wasn't really a choice at all, and that by changing the rules, she was adhering to her original function of creating true choice.
Online tools are fine for quick tests, but they are not an oracle for correctness.
Only philosophical dogmas and different ideas about yin yang.
Only problem i see; why wouldnt he just say that cosmic is yinyang? Instead some obscure thing where he doesnt mention cosmic and yinyang together
Only the trainman knows how to navigate out of purgatory 🤷
only way to return to the source is possible with keymaker
On the curve, the x-coordinate defines the entire duality of Y....
openssl doesn’t give wrong answers “sometimes” it gives bad outputs for bad inputs. it’s an algorithm not an oracle
opposites attracts also yin-yang
Oracle- 6
Oracle also wears yin-yang earrings so it's a subtle nod to the theory
oracle apartment 314
ORACLE: As long as it can.
ORACLE: Change always is.
ORACLE: Do I have your word?
oracle inserted love, equation balanced in smiths hate
oracle-queen
ORACLE: The ones that want out.
ORACLE: Well now, ain’t this a surprise.
ORACLE: What about the others?
Oracle would definitely be the better half
or any other part of puzzle except Cosmic Duality
Or fefe is visual placement of one of the dots in a yin yang?
Or for example, the architect's speech has 1539 characters in its decoding. Remove all the spaces in SalPhaseIon, encrypt it using the well-known VIC method, and you will find 1539 digits. This is, of course, a coincidence. All good luck👋
or mean nothing if or mean the yin yinyang
Or proceed with the yingyang :)
or smth else sounds like yinyang?
Or use brute force password SalPhaseIon to decode Cosmic Duality using Openssl 💬
people here said it should get readable text but i was able to decrypt cosmic duality from this also
Persephone kissing Neo, is another machine to machine communication.
Persephone was the so of merovingian tho
Persephone: Where are you going?
Phase 0,1,2,3,3.2 is one part of yinyang
PHASE2 ( 2.1 ) The ironic 2name of the keymakers trying to protect the current digital powers which are still in severe danger due to the keymaker's way of security by hiding, nearly unprotected, in plain sight. {eps3.4_[in one of the valleys of Phillip]runtime-error.r00., where daughters hit magic keypads} When this fails.. Crypto finally to the latin 3Moon? Tell me, 4How so mate?
phase 2 didn't only contain the safenet cordinates, it also had the decentraland cordinates. duality
phase 3.2 decrypted result is 64 char and Cosmic Duality decrypted result is 1312 char.
phase 3.2, salph and cosmic duality AES blobs
Picture of a book titled "Cosmic Duality".
Pieces ? 🧐 we have only one hint, "that is salphaseion", is there any other piece ? I bet someone has found it already but not declaring it publicly, i don't think so that no body found it or solved aes 3.2 because JrK is hinting yin yang for cosmic duality(next phase) so someone is there but not declaring it
please don't write if you don't know what you're talking about. If anyone has a correct and verifiable method for decrypting Cosmic Duality, please write it. the other wise please stfu
Point being, its a yin yang and its also 2 different hex encoded strings from the same input (possibly hinting at what we should be doing now with all we know and have so far)
Possible Interpretations of Duality:
Possible to be another vibe coded rubbish, but I’m still convinced I did not find a proper way to work with the given qr. I think deciphered salphaseion and cosmic duality are no more than instructions to work with the very first puzzle image, and it has to be the qr section in my opinion
prime definitely lead to yinyang since prime is required to proceed further right now
Prime is not the issue, prime is already solved and JrK know about it, issue is yin yang
- primes were mention in the architects speech, not just the hints
prime = yinyang?
print(f"Yin Yang patterns found at: {found_yin_yang}")
print("Image with arrow saved as 'highlighted_yin_yang_arrow.png'")
print("Image with numbers saved as 'highlighted_yin_yang_numbers.png'")
print("No potential Yin Yang patterns found.")
Probably decodes to an image of the yin-yang symbol
question. The Architect: Quite right. "QUESTION ME QUITE"
Quick question @SoWut [https://t.me/SoWut] how to hit yin yang ?
"Raising the stakes without extra chances of winning. A fubcd-king & oracle-queen, thingky mvps, on a sad board but as wide as the first one seen."
Raising the stakes without extra chances of winning. A fubcd-king & oracle-queen, thingky mvps, on a sad board but as wide as the first one seen
Raising the stakes without extra chances of winning. A fubcd-king & oracle-queen, thingky mvps, on a sad board but as wide as the first one seen.
Read what I said again; I might not share everything just yet until I figure out how to use my notes on the systematic yin-yang approach.
real shit tho… jrk himself said yin yang was in next phase
reasoning is because of creators remarks about YinYang image and how a post here of a yinyang by another user caused those remarks
replace "The Architecte" with me you will get
Return to the source was about the code of bitcoin. Ying yang is probably Cosmic Duality. The image was first then everything else. Cosmic Duality came later. The first time ying yang was seen was in the actual image. It could just mean Cosmic Duality is waiting for you.
reversed binary: yellow blue primes matrixsumlistlastwordsbeforearchichoiceyinyangwewontgiveawaythepassworditsinfrontofyoureyesbutyourenotseeingitverylaststepisatruegiveawaypromised
reversed binary: yellowblueprimesmatrixsumlistlastwordsbeforearchichoiceyinyangwewontgiveawaythepassworditsinfrontofyoureyesbutyourenotseeingitverylaststepisatruegiveawaypromised
"reverse programming" -  such a thought. architect first made shit matrix and then "gave meaning to colors" yellow blue
right now we are not only looking for the BTC, but also for Satoshi, which is the second prime for the duality problem
Rules of Yin-Yang puzzle:
saber is the cosmic duality of jrk: he says lots of words without any content, jrk says few words with lots of content
safenet is a keymaker, but i believe that must be overview as part of phase 3 solution
Salph and cosmic duality have 14 blobs
Salphaseion and also cosmicduality I imagined a result close to this!!!
SalPhaseIon and Cosmic Duality was found by hashing text, probably need to do something similar, for example to understand atleast SHA and how it works to proceed
SalPhaseIon can represent a more mundane, material or physical state of consciousness, while Cosmic Duality can represent a higher, spiritual or metaphysical state of consciousness.
Salphaseion & cosmic duality
SalPhaseIon -> Cosmic Duality (YinYang) -> Phase 3.2 AES blob
Salphaseion didn't require any changes to the puzzle to get to it, only a different approach.... So the AES blob in it cannot hold a second key, also because that would make "cosmic duality" kind of pointless since it's after SalPhaseIon....
salphaseion is the door to the right in the architect's speech
salphaseion wont have the key in it for sure cause then whats the point of cosmic duality
salphaseon and cosmic duality are 2 halves. so maybe the key is to use something in cosmic to solve salphaeion and vise versa, but im sure people have treid this
Salphasion and cosmic duality is harder
Salphasion is following the architect speech on (even) and anamolies on (odd) - has anyone found that?
Salph is another part of yinyang
salvation aes blob holds the password to cosmic duality
salvation and cosmic duality are also a copy of phase2 / phase 3 setup
salvation is challenging but what makes cosmic less challenging is because we would have had all the hints needed from the decryption of salvation to get into cosmic duality, that's why he said it's a give away
scottmanning.com/content/the-architect-transcript/
search "cosmic duality pdf"
# Search for potential Yin Yang patterns
see block 13, which is also reverse yin yang prime 13-31 and the other yellow 31-13
(SHA-256) AnsToo = Neo's response after the "the last words Architect said before giving Neo the choice "
(SHA-256) LastWordsBeforeArchitectChoice = the last words Architect said before giving Neo the choice
s h a b e f a n s t o o -> sha 256( b e f ) ans too -> possibly hinting cosmic duality pass is inside salphasion aes
Shouldn’t it be able to solve the puzzle with cosmic duality I think many people solved
showcasing kind of a balanced looking matrix, like yin yang
Show tags h1: <H1> SalPhaseIon </H1> vs <h1> Cosmic Duality </h1> suggesting in uppercase perhaps the password, or sha256
Similarities in the Concept of Cosmic Duality between Archie Comics and The Matrix
SIMmeTRY: 777 above 666 below, yin yang.
Since I got past cosmic duality I been stuck on the last hint/riddle like it’s so obvious but at the same time it’s the concept that’s obvious but exciting it is confusing
Since the first clue, "theseedisplanted," was solved using binary ("black & white = 0 & 1"), the next clue is YIN-YANG blue-yellow.
Since they together form the complete point on the curve, this resembles the Yin-Yang concept:
so 1 microstep further brings us to "yinyang"
So basically may be architect was pointing out us "the code we hopefully carry" prime basics "may be" my interpretation but yellow blue primes and decentraland cordinates are proved mathamatically as per prime basics, 41,17 via yellow blue sqaure of 9 and 15
so basically the cosmic duality will be decrypted by having encoded salph + encoded 3.2 blob
So far I tired 2 ways one going back to the rabbit I was able to take the path the rabbit made and link it to theseedisplanted and ended up using a password I got from cosmic duality to go far I unlocked the blue lock continue to lock the red one “creation and destruction” I has made a path to the wallet but there’s a certain order I think it needs to be unlocked in
so first prime then yinyang
So here is my idea on testing "yinyang" quite literally:
so how do we even form a yin yang
so i got a straight non-breaking "COWMUG" after sumlisting the yinyang. where do I write to, to get the coffee cow mug?
So I've passed salph about a month and a half ago, the YingYang hint was extremely amazing help. However I'm stuck and keep going down a rabbit hole (lol)
solve salph -> enter cosmic duality yin yang -> solve 3.2.2 with cosmic duality solution
Solving Salphaseion's base64 will likely yield the key to solving cosmic duality
solving the salphaseion, what would be the next step? how to unlock the cosmic duality? where is the private key after all salphaseion or cosmic duality?
so makes sense for salph/cosmic duality to have another key
Some information about yin yang of prime numbers
some of us are still stuck outside the door of salvation and we haven't been able to decode the dbbi and faed phase but you all already gone past the cosmic duality phase. you all are super smart bro
Someone send the full cosmic duality book here but I can’t find it
Some people have noticed that this is like a form that is sent to https://gsmg.io/phase1verification Using name and password, and if you have to build something similar to ( SalPhaseIon / Cosmic Duality)
So much has been used previously that the possibilities are exponential by now. We could decode the aes blob to total utf8 gibberish, reverse bits, shift by the fuckyoracle alphabet, convert from 1141, rot13, get a string of decimal, convert to hex, then ascii, then atbash, then reverse. Who tf knows what jrk did or how deep it is at this point.
so next one must need a keymaker i guess
So no one has solved Cosmic Duality?
So not only have you solved dbbid and faed but you have solved the AES blob for salphasion? What about cosmic duality AES? Did you solve that too?
so now there is 4 architect in this puzzle- 1- Satoshi, 2- Jacque Fresco, 3- The original Matrix, 4- GSMG(or JRK Team etc) but choice word is question of debate in The original matrix archi and jacque fresco, rest puzzle architect using reference of both, i never heard any choice word regarding satoshi, as it was he chooses to write bitcoin white paper
So... Perhaps there's a duality to many clues and we need to pair stuff up in the next phase
sorry im just idea dumping cause i want this shit to be solved lol this part of ciao bella text is interesting, hes telling us we are neo and he is the architect, obviously we know that but this is incredible intentional refromated it says
So salphaseion is encrypted message contains a passphrase and i think hints about the next phase so using the password when decrypt the Salphaseion gives us the cosmic duality
So styx performed after the death of johnnie johnson after 13th april, the song I am walrus which is beatles song and B side ia Hello good bye( ciao bella yin yang) and you can check hello good bye song wikipedia as well ehete its clearly mentioned, " the answer for everything is simple, everything is nothing"
So, the last words before the Architect gives Neo the choice are
so the password is where we would find challenging to get into the cosmic duality because we will be needing all the information in salvation to get into cosmic
so the private keymaker might want one of those
so the red and the white its the same thing .. white rose and black rose is yin yang ..
SO THERE İS NO PUBLIC SOLUTION FOR SALPHASEİON AND COSMIC DUALİTY ?
so there is something else than aes blob on cosmic duality
So this is like the architect dialog but different, why is this?
So trying to understand yin yang as per mathematics and in view of creator hint
Sounds like the solution is linked back to the very first clue you got. It’s like a circle, where the beginning and the end are connected. sounds like yinyang part it's our frist hint its your last command
So we can interpret it like yellow blue prime(for 3.2 phase) matri.....(for salphaseion) yin yang(for cosmic)
So we dont need to search for yingyang in particular, cause its the next phase
So we have dbbib faed and the last AES of salphasion. Plus another AES unsolved, correct? All before we touch cosmic duality?
So we have two branches from source one leading upto phase 3.2 and one is Salph and duality.....but why would anyone create 2 branches as it would hold no connection...only relation due to source
So we look for the door to Cosmic Duality.
So what does a yin yang mean in practice?
So what Im thinking is Cosmic Duality AES blob is pretty similar content to Jrk's binary hint
so what words do you think make the most sense to solve cosmic duality
@SoWut [https://t.me/SoWut] Can you confirm if this is the solution to the cosmic phase duality?
@SoWut [https://t.me/SoWut] can you tell us if the third "door" is accessed after we solve more of salphasion/cosmic duality or if we can get to it before we solve any of salphasion/cosmic duality?
@SoWut [https://t.me/SoWut] could tell us if someone found the yingyang yet :D
@SoWut [https://t.me/SoWut] Hi, friend. Can you confirm that someone has gone through the Salf and Cosmic duality phase?
@SoWut [https://t.me/SoWut] I hit yinyang emoji. what is next?
@SoWut [https://t.me/SoWut] Just look at their latest clues; they don't say anything specific, like yin/yang, "it will be resolved on the same day," etc. They don't provide any context.
@SoWut [https://t.me/SoWut] ok, if you are not giving hint anymore but atleast give us a list of "typo" so that we don't waste time on these words 😂 like "rabbits", "theorised", "belikins", "keymakers", "keymaker's" , "phillip", "keypads", "waisting", "throphies"    atleast we deserve it
@SoWut [https://t.me/SoWut] the decryption of cosmic duality led me to 2 doors ... one starting with b6 and the second is f7 (all values hex) a hint about the right one? :)
@SoWut [https://t.me/SoWut] When you say “yingyang is reached”, should solvers expect a visual output/image, a readable text phrase, a URL/hash, or a successful decryption?
@SoWut [https://t.me/SoWut] why did you refer us back to "The ironic 2name of the keymakers trying to protect the current digital powers which are still in severe danger due to the keymaker's way of security by hiding, nearly unprotected, in plain sight. {eps3.4_[in one of the valleys of Phillip]runtime-error.r00., where daughters hit magic keypads} When this fails.. Crypto finally to the latin 3Moon? Tell me, 4How so mate?" , If "# X 2 S H 4 Y 0 Q B 15 #" doesn't get us anywhere??  I told you you will make us more confused.
so yinhyang is the next phase and X and silver are there
So you decrypted cosmic duality in gibbersish way or with ciphertext ?
Sry for spam with so simple message but i just wish people pay more attention to details and duality theme
stop thinking about yinyang, you didnt figure out "yellow blue primes" :))
Suppose X chromosome is yin and Y chromosome is yang, female have XX and male have XY, now both have X common and Y is opposite but when XY combined then still it is Yang,  so nothing is beyond yin yang, got it ?
Take the SalPhaseIon / Cosmic Duality segment. It’s completely standalone — something that could have been added or activated at any time without disturbing the earlier stages.
thanks i already descrypt cosmic duality correctly but im stuck a bin file is generated but i dont know what do with this
Thanks, yeah I was thinking along the same lines. The logo itself is a spiral, like yingyang maybe.
Thank you for designing an elegant and exceptionally challenging multi-year puzzle. The architecture, from the initial steganography to the layered cryptographic commitments, was a pleasure to deconstruct.
than the architect said, hope it is the quintessential…..
that alone makes yinyang THE keyword, dont you think???
That architect speech that so far is not used for anything other than JRK to talk shit about our solving skills....
That cookie given by the oracle its a wink:
that i acknowledge. but dbbi/faed is essential for the aes, thus for cosmic duality.
That is another door to the illusion of duality xD
That is the cosmic duality of this puzzle
That really sucks, medicine is definitely catered to the common things, and funding for treatments is given on the basis of how many people get affected by illnesses. so it's a tough road for people who have things that are uncommon or diagnostic anomalies.
that salpahseon and cosmic duality really2 hard
that's because Salphaseion and cosmic duality together is the second door of the puzzle I guess
that's how to solve the cosmic duality
that's, most likely, where bruteforcing will need to happen once we definetely know the password... unless, these are not aes256 encrypted at all, and we need to use certain bits out of them to complete the others, aka yin yang
thats part of what i was trying to get at earlier, most are so stuck on dbbib and faed that they think by solving them then thats it, done dada.... As if cosmic duality isnt just sitting there waiting and as if they know what it holds for us if anything once we get there... There are diff reasons why a majority are all stuck at same place with no escape, but continuously dragging more and more new minds/people down the same path I believe is not the answer here... its not processing power thats needed to crack this, its a different approach...
thats the oracle exploit
thats the real cosmic duality: we will stand in awe to whoever solves it yet we will flip him off :))))))
thats the same as in the matrix when neo meets the architect and tells neo to make a choice.
that's where we need the ying yang and I dont see anything else after the cosmic duality
That's why jrk used cosmic duality word because its showing duality concept which confusing us to focus on one theory
thats why we have salph and cosmic duality
That's yin-yang!
that usd duality is tricking your mind
that was in reference to cosmic duality book , he never actually found ying yang
That would mean both wallets are mathematically linked and actually come from the same cryptographic source, just expressed as two opposite private keys. This fits the yin-yang hint perfectly: two complementary halves of one whole.
The 1327-byte blob is simply the AES-decrypted output of the Cosmic Duality stage.
The Architect
The Architect and key maker surely come here on there free time and have fun reading idias
"The Architect: Apropos, she entered the matrix to save your life at the cost of her own."
The Architect: Apropos, she entered the matrix to save your life at the cost of her own.
The Architect, as creator of the Matrix, is also well aware of The One's existence and purpose, referring to The One as an "eventuality".
the architect choice JFK challenge to the federal reserve
The Architect could feel the rush down Neo's veins when he got to know that Trinity came into the Matrix to rescue him at the cost of her own life.
The Architect: Denial is the most predictable of all human responses. But, rest assured, this will be the sixth time we have destroyed it, and we have become exceedingly efficient at it.
The Architect [https://www.imdb.com/name/nm0048127/?ref_=ttch_qu]: Denial is the most predictable of all human responses. But, rest assured, this will be the sixth time we have destroyed it, and we have become exceedingly efficient at it.
The Architect [https://www.imdb.com/name/nm0048127/?ref_=ttch_qu]: You are here because Zion is about to be destroyed. Its every living inhabitant terminated, its entire existence eradicated.
The Architect: Humph. Hope, it is the quintessential human delusion, simultaneously the source of your greatest strength, and your greatest weakness.
"The Architect: It is interesting reading your reactions. Your five predecessors were by design based on a similar predication, a contingent affirmation that was meant to create a profound attachment to the rest of your species, facilitating the function of the one. While the others experienced this in a very general way, your experience is far more specific. Vis-a-vis, love.
the architect left us in this room and turned the lights off
The Architect: Quite right. Interesting. That was quicker than the others.
the architect said that as part of the puzzle
The Architect: The function of the One is now to return to the source, allowing a temporary dissemination of the code you carry, reinserting the prime program. After which you will be required to select from the matrix 23 individuals, 16 female, 7 male, to rebuild Zion. Failure to comply with this process will result in a cataclysmic system crash killing everyone connected to the matrix, which coupled with the extermination of Zion will ultimately result in the extinction of the entire human race.
The architect told neo that Trinity was going to die. That he had to choose between her and Zion. That is the phase of this puzzle we are in
the architect wanted to for Neo to go back to the source and thus get his logging data and restart a better iteration of the matrix
The Architect: We won't
The Architect: Which brings us at last to the moment of truth, wherein the fundamental flaw is ultimately expressed, and the anomaly revealed as both beginning, and end. There are two doors. The door to your right leads to the source, and the salvation of Zion. The door to the left leads back to the matrix, to her, and to the end of your species. As you adequately put, the problem is choice. But we already know what you’re going to do, don’t we? Already I can see the chain reaction, the chemical precursors that signal the onset of emotion, designed specifically to overwhelm logic, and reason. An emotion that is already blinding you from the simple, and obvious truth: she is going to die, and there is nothing that you can do to stop it.
The Architect: You are here because Zion is about to be destroyed. Its every living inhabitant terminated, its entire existence eradicated.
The Architect: Your life is the sum of a remainder of an unbalanced equation inherent to the programming of the matrix. You are the eventuality of an anomaly, which despite my sincerest efforts I have been unable to eliminate from what is otherwise a harmony of mathematical precision. While it remains a burden assiduously avoided, it is not unexpected, and thus not beyond a measure of control. Which has led you, inexorably, here.
the "are you looking for the private keymaker" ?
The blob in the phase 3.2 with the architect’s speech says go back go the source codes and insert the pirme basics. So is this refering to the another door like Jrk’s first hint?
the blue and yellow yinyang
The cause and effect must be contiguous in space (cosmic duality) and time.
The concept of "last words before Archie's choice" and elements of The Matrix are connected to cosmic duality through the themes of ambiguous choice, death as a balance, and love as a cosmic force. In Archie Comics, Betty and Veronica are a yin-yang duality maintained through Archie's uncertainty. In The Matrix, Neo navigates the duality of the Matrix vs. the real world, with Trinity's love as a balance. Both use death and last words to maintain cosmic balance without a final resolution, reflecting the eternal cycle inherent in cosmic duality.
The concept of yinyang in Chinese philosophy may imply the use of the concept or symbols of Yin and Yang as part of an encryption or decryption method in cryptographic problems. Yin and Yang philosophy is an ancient Chinese philosophical concept that emphasizes that the universe is composed of two opposing yet interdependent forces, such as Yin and Yang, or the Five Elements of Yin and Yang. In cryptography, symbols or concepts from various cultures, histories, or philosophies can be used as part of encryption algorithms to increase the complexity and security of a password. Therefore, the use of the Yin and Yang concept in China may be to increase the difficulty of the password, making it harder for crackers to decrypt.
The cookie the oracle gives Neo acts as a "reset", so he can choose for real
The Cosmic Duality could be that legendary another door.
The cosmic duality is
the cosmic duality is AES yes u need the key to it
The cosmic_duality is correctly decrypted. The resulting binary does not contain cleartext by design.
The "Cosmic Duality" phase of the puzzle provided two files:
The cosmic duality section(from the salpheslon and cosmic duality image) contain 14 base64 encoded AES encrypted blobs, each 64 bytes long(48 bytes after decoding: 64x3/4 = 48).
The cosmic duality yielded some garbage after decoding.
The decoding of the two pieces of information, "SalPhaseIon" and "Cosmic Duality", can be interpreted in several ways. One interpretation is that they refer to two states of consciousness or reality.
the decrypt is meant to be directly readable as text ?  cause I decrypted the cosmic duality and it's garbled shit.
* The duality is between the order to be discovered, and the chaos to be organized.
* The duality is between what is visible and what is hidden.
* The duality is in the relationship between the puzzle and its solution.
The Duality of man
"the end is coming", the yin yang goes to the alpha omega duality
the few of us in cosmic duality aka ying yang wouldn't be happy about the leaks I am giving as hints because we are trying to gain more ground and almost about to  solve the final part of the puzzle
The final gate is mirage, The keymaker vault is empty and wisdom the real prize you got, Architect choice was distraction
The first page of the novel includes an actual chess board ("first one seen"), the chess board includes a black king (-king) and a black queen (-queen). What is the opposite/negative of white? It's black. A chess board usually has white and black squares. This all ties into the concept of yin yang.
The format of his hint that mentioned yin yang seem to be a concatenation of salvation
The Greek philosopher's vision of the structure of the universe was of tremendous significance and is a prime example of a particular way humans have dealt with the problem of duality.
the hint "yellow blue prime .matrix sum list lastwordsbeforearchichoice yin yang"
The ironic 2name of the keymakers
The ironic 2name of the keymakers trying to protect the current digital powers which are still in severe danger due to the keymaker's way of security by hiding, nearly unprotected, in plain sight
The ironic 2name of the keymakers trying to protect the current digital powers which are still in severe danger due to the keymaker's way of security by hiding, nearly unprotected, in plain sight.
The ironic 2name of the keymakers trying to protect the current digital powers which are still in severe danger due to the keymaker's way of security by hiding, nearly unprotected, in plain sight. {eps3.4_[in one of the valleys of Phillip]runtime-error.r00., where daughters hit magic keypads} When this fails.. Crypto finally to the latin 3Moon? Tell me, 4How so mate?
The ironic 2name of the keymakers trying to protect the current digital powers which are still in severe danger due to the keymaker's way of security by hiding, nearly unprotected, in plain sight. {eps3.4_[in one of the valleys of Phillip]runtime-error.r00., where daughters hit magic keypads} When this fails.. Crypto finally to the latin 3Moon? Tell me, 4How so mate?\r\n# X 2 S H 4 Y 0 Q B 15 #\r\nQ -> extend the name of a hackers' swordless fish, the I and W are below.\r\nB -> ((BV80605001911AP)- (sqrt(-1)))^2\r\nH -> (Answer to only this puzzle but nothing else) * -1\r\nS -> cha' + (vagh * jav)\r\nOk kid, on the highway, let put it in the worst gear.\b\b\b\b\b\b\b\b
the key is balance. Yin Yang. You need to be both the past and the future, today
The Keymaker guides Neo, Morpheus, and Trinity to a power station building. The goal was to shut down the power grid so Neo could reach the Source.
The keymaker is CAUSALITY.
the keymaker's way of security by hiding, nearly unprotected, in plain sight
The Keymaker warns them that the building will explode if the backup power isn’t disabled first.
The Key of (SalPhaseIon/Cosmic Duality)It will take the image from the beginning, follow the white rabbit
The key to understanding the cosmos lies in duality.
The last task is hard but not in a sense of difficulty more or it a riddle that needs to be solved so have cosmic comes this Congratulations! You have solved the Cosmic Duality challenge.
"The last words before Architect 'choice'" "this password"
The last words of Archichoice (Architect of Matrix) are the last words from Jesus (if google is right)
"The matrix Has You" is trigger point for me seriously, if we(us) as indicated by Architect(me, as per para 3.2 phase) then it means we are trapped, so technically Architect(jrk) and we(us) are matrix, so if we trapped in matrix then we don't have choice, i mean there is no choice, you can resist only like an anarchist(in case of puzzle its Satoshi)
The Matrix vs Mr.Robot philosofy is Coismic Duality
The Meeting neo and oracle, just search on youtube
the normal expected format that's used before is to decode an entire block of data, then use those answers, collate them all in one string, and use the hash of that string to decode the cosmic duality
Then send your bin to @SoWut [https://t.me/SoWut] , if it's true, he'll post in chat something like: one has found the yin-yang.
then the last words before architecture choice
then we gonna sort the black and White and the rest squares to make it like yinyang do this and swnd a picture to me to start dig in it
Then you reach cosmic duality where the puzzle both exists and doesn't exist
Then you start war for quality after cosmic duality
the One to reach the source without the Keymaker program so long as the One can obtain the key to the Source and has the information necessary to bypass the security protecting the door to the Source (such information can probably be provided by, say, the Oracle)
the one with cosmic duality
the only place where it mentions that is impossible to break, is 322 architect speech
The only thing the door has introduced is to further make the puzzle solution get even longer and more complicating because now that we have to deal with a duality of the puzzle there's always so much to be missed... whereas we were already close to solving the first door...
the oracle
The oracle calls Smith (Agent) the end
the oracle install the one program with the cookies once she is aware a critical awareness is being built in zion
The Oracles of Salvation in Salphation
the Oracle will send you to The Architect and his two fateful doors.
Theory of everything could simply allude to yin yang philosophy
the part after AES is shabef ans too.. so after AES decryption if we hash it maybe it decrypts the cosmic duality
the part that says last words before archichoice , was never meant to look into the dialogue between neo and architect , it can't be we won't , cause that's just the last words not before anything , [it is before neo opens the door but not before he chooses to ] I think the last words before archichoice is exactly what it's trying to tell us : "last words before "  now what we have next , we have " this password"  what it will be : "last words before this password "
Thepassword- this is more than likely a callback to the keymaker. The keymaker is a program. He carries an assortment of door keys that represent complex encryption passwords that can enter doors located in secret backdoor within the matrix.
The perfect yin yang. Take 2 hours to digest this thoroughly and you know what the puzzle is saying: HODL, stop waisting your life time.
The phase 3.3 aes password is in the main image after some dumb retarted transformation about primes and yinyang. Good luck finding it though, infinite ways to try that
The prime mentioned on door via creator have too many yin yang combination with answer
The problem is "ok" and "cancel", it show yin hang or duality, my bet you should try OcancelK and you will have key of 5 btc, Good Luck and enjoy 👍🏻
the problem lies where when Neo: is replaced with :you and "The Architect" replaced with "me"
The puzzle does not have phase 4 or 5, they were called 3, 3.2 - decentraland and Salphaseion and cosmic duality are called by their names.
the quote is from the book Cosmic Duality
The rabbit grid's prime distribution and overlaying models, it identified a literal spiral pattern emerging from the green (prime) region dots and yellow/blue paths. Identifying the primes and path tracing them it layered a spiral model. The overlay aligned perfectly with the grid's structure, which resulted in a spiral formation. The spiral is not random and directly relates to the cosmic duality and balance.
there are 2 doors and then 3 doors now we have 4 doors because cosmic duality also have 2 new doors inside
There are probably elements of the whole puzzle used in cosmic duality
There has been no reference to yin Yang in the puzzle itself
There is a chance that there is someone out there that is either on another path in the puzzle or has proceeded beyond salph or cosmic duality
There is also another important point: we can be someone's oracle.  Legend has it that the Oracle of Delphi said: “- Socrates is the wisest of men!”  Socrates then asks himself: “- What do you mean?  I do not know anything!  What did the Oracle mean?”  From this moment on, Socrates decides to dedicate his life to discovering what the Oracle meant.  He sought out the great intellectuals of his time.  And so he ended up becoming a sage.
there is more than one door and you need all doors in duality to solve the puzzle
There is no architect here, that's the big point bro, if u solve it, you got it
there is no btcseed, encryption rules are different a little, no hint's i agree with that, any hint now is like give a pkeys, i think that's not fair, at these stage, b'cose that's final stage, cosmic duality blob with one pkey and phase 3,2 not resolved second pkey.
There is no evidence anyone is trying to scam. Someone who is inexperienced might think they have decoded something or see a pattern in something and interpret it as progress. They never said they partially decrypted an AES blob, they said they partially solved the cosmic duality stage. Filling the chat with 100+ messages of telling someone they are useless and throwing other insults at them is not helpful.
There is no other URL. The another door is the Cosmic Duality.
there is no way to hide a data like salph or cosmic duality into any unexplained part of previous phases
There is no way you can crack AES-256 even with a future quantum computer and you can’t perform oracle or side channel attacks in this case, you’re beating the air
theres a beautiful duality:
There's a beautiful duality between beaufort and vigenere:
The salph and cosmic duality is the matrix
The scene where the architect and the oracle
these are architect's words
These are the mentions of yingyang in the book listed in the index
the seed is planted when opposites attract, yinyang etc
The seed planted with opposite attract reflecting the grids yellow/vlue duality and the tiles lock/unlocked lock
The solution is quite clear, the correct elements were used to decrypt the cosmic duality
the solution to these questions is divided into several parts, my assumption is into four parts, they are all located outside those parts where the questions are asked and which we are trying to solve, they are outside but in no way inside, so our consciousness, our brain and our efforts must understand what is missing and what information we need must be used and in what order to solve phase 3 2 2 with alfazion or cosmic duality
The song says red rose or black rose, no in between. The Merovingian says there is only causality and one constant, one universal, no deviation. No in between. The system has no middle options?  The puzzle IS the warning. Warning about what? That the judgement is coming? That you will be asked which flower you are. That the answer has consequences.
the source code was talking about the movie scene where Neo met with the Architect and Better half refers to Trinity
The starting point was the final choice Neo makes, the word count included the Architect's preceding dialogue, starting from Neo's response
The sum of matrixsumlist and cosmic duality is same 41 as per gematria numerals
the train station was a realm out of the matrix , thats how merovingian scaped the resets
🟠 The two AES blobs ("Yin-Yang structure?") — 6/10
The universe is governed by a cosmic duality, sets of two opposing and complementary cosmic principles or energies that can be observed in nature.  ying and yang. @SoWut [https://t.me/SoWut]
The white dot in the black area and the black dot in the white area connote coexistence and unity of opposites to form a whole. The curvy line signifies that there are no absolute separations between the two opposites. The yin-yang symbol, then, embodies both sides: duality, paradox, unity in diversity, change, and harmony.
the word "hope" is the 48th word from the end of the Architect's speech
they are intentional errors to keep us off from the point, we needed to make meanings to it but no error she be ignored because that's where the actual point is probably leading to if not a part of the solution, like the " A fubcd-king & oracle-queen, thingky mvps"
They are opposite to each other but they are part of each, like your poem, you din't catch it, "the sead is planted when opposite attract each other, one create another" it is yin yang👍🏻
The yinyang
the "yin-yang" are frequently mentioned here
the yinyang its the
The yinyang theme of this puzzle is really good and I'm curious what kind of creator (or team) could masterfully combine yinyang with this puzzle.  There are some imaginative steps in the puzzle, which impressed me deeply, its drunk mind of creator
the yin yang thing is interesting too, since JRK states you can solve all this with just hitting that.... its def math related and matrixsumlist is prob where the yin yang will be found, good chance at least
they would make a perfect yinyang as well
Think Cosmic Duality…
Think of the Matrix movie. Neo tried everything he could, but the architect said you have already tried everything in infinite iterations and the result is the same.
This AES on cosmic duality is salted.
This could be a symbolic reference to philosophical dualism in meaning — the idea that contrasting states or values are not merely opposites but are interconnected. Using this as inspiration, I am considering whether prime numbers might function as references in a book cipher or some form of encoding that uses the book’s structure, imagery, or conceptual duality as part of the cipher key.
this is an interesting approach... I believe the discussion came after cosmic duality so I believe YinYang has something to do with Salphaseion or cosmic duality phases??
This is an interesting read on AES CBC vulnerabilties such as bit flipping & oracle attacks. Might not be relevant for the aes blobs as oracle is needed though.
this is duality, k talking to its user
This is dumb chatgpt text, it's shorter than duality aes
This is just how I imagine the base64 output of Cosmic Duality.I imagine it prints a .json
this is not an image of photon entanglement. if you read the actual paper it is explained that, in testing information reconstruction from biphoton states, the researchers encoded the Yin-Yang symbol onto the pump beam photons superimposed with reference photons. the superposition of these waveforms was then split into photon pairs which, after being separated, were sent onto a single photon sensor array.
This is not a password. For Yinyang, only @SoWut [https://t.me/SoWut]  can tell with a yes or no.
this is not a solid yin yang puzzle so i dont believe it follows those strict rules or method... just what the creator sees to be a yin yang
This is oracle & arhitector
this is the correct way to rebuild another yin yang matrix
This is the Spanish translation of the Italian word "ciao", meaning both "hello" and "goodbye".  In the context of the puzzle, the definition of the word implies the concept of "yinyang".
This is word from the oracle
This link is in regards to not just the duality concept but also a glaring extra piece in the puzzle that has bothered me for the longest... "Your life is the sum of" text... Go to the end of it.... Look for "entireness of yourself (self)"... The extra "self" in this text is not a mistake, but never made sense either except when reading the text as a script literally.... "You" ; "Me" ; "Self"... Notice that there are 3 people in the script... So, as a player in this game, am I the "You" or am I "Self"? Possible to be both as well, who knows???
this message suggest a third door or it means somethink about the architect message
this methodology is directly related to the duality, prime numbers, binary, etc of the puzzle
this one was hint for salphasion phase, second door exist for 3.2 phase and 3.2 phase have primes for cosmic duality 👍🏻
this passwords xor them u will find the exact aes bob thats  in cosmic duality im didnt how but if someone find this helpfull please let me know
thispaword (yinyang )
This post documents a reproducibility audit of Phase 3 (Cosmic Duality) using public artifacts only.
this puzzle have a clue about yin-yang
This puzzle is following 5 elements as per yin yang
this reminds me of the duality of jrk and saber
this "The Architect: Which brings us at last to the moment of truth, wherein the fundamental flaw is ultimately expressed, and the anomaly revealed as both beginning, and end. " I suspect to be the lastwordsbeforearchichoice
this the next phase the yinyang .. square of white and black inside it then blue and yellow
("Throkvor"): "Pando shaquali voriasi Korvu throk prima, nirixi throk prima. Valtor kali shaquali pando, shaquali voriasi xorvath nexus. Kali shaquali voriasi throkvor hexalim, nexus shaquali voriasi pando."
Today I thought that cosmic duality meant that you reality of light so I took the wavelength of blue and yellow and tried different combinations to find the seed to implement
To decode the string in the cosmic duality phase we are going to need the encryption key or IV
to get into salvation you still need dbbib and you'd be face with the duality phase
Too bad. That's was an awesome show. A bit redundant in character but the creative side of the diagnostics were so fascinating
to solve the dbbdi its from the book of cosmic duality ..
Total 14 blobs in cosmic duality last part includes selphrase
Trainman is related to 3.2.2/salph?🤓
trainman will leave us with only one tit after the halving 😞
Transfender in actual is balanced perfectly balanced and yin yang as well
Try shah of 44 for the decryption key of cosmic duality
Two fish yin yang. I'll have to research that. I've only used openssl with the same command structure as previous phases
Unfortunately, I'm not an architect. I want to be the chosen one.
Unless you've solved it you have no idea what the yin yang string is
Unlike the previous iterations of the One before him, Neo did not complete the Path of the One. Instead of going through the door on his right in the Architect's chamber, he left the Path of the One and went through the door to his left. This means that he left the Path of the One and began to follow his own path, essentially the Path of Neo
Visual layers (yin-yang, prime numbers) are very stable and show complex patterns, but no clear QR or Base58 results yet….
Wang and Yang study Cosmic duality of SPI-NOR (that is type of flash memory) field.
was just throwing out there to see if anyone had tried to reach out to this person that now has an avatar to "talk" with and see if anything at all, anything new at least, could be learned before I waste my time/find the "keymaker" (creator of the magic puzzle piece)
was salphaseion / cosmic duality cracked?
We could also be looking for the: "private keymaker"
We don't even know where yin yang is used. I'm presuming faed will make that clear
we dont have any information rather than Cosmic Duality that can be a door
we dont have any other unsolved AES blob or any other long cipher or online page so only possible DOOR is cosmic duality
We had mentioned duality in the context of salvation and now you want to split the solution to 2 different situation
we just need to get into cosmic duality?
Welcome to the Cosmic Duality Challenge!
Well I dreamed about the solution. It was a bunch of random symbols and characters (some Chinese) that we had to perform math operations on in a complex equation. It was given in a blob at the end of cosmic duality with further instructions using symbols that had a yinyang vibe and more questions about whether to perform the operations on one character at a time or in groups. The string looked incomplete as though other parts of the key were scattered throughout the puzzle. It felt like the end beginning at the same time.
Well, I spent a good amount of time analyzing the image and came to a conclusion about the cousins, but the yin yang part is impossible to find; there are too many possibilities.
Well, then why didn't you see the YIN-YANG
well, yingyang and primes come togehter but doesnt mean you need primes first
well... you can also say the 'architect speech' is the result of 3.2, so the last 'significant words' are 'ciao bella o'.... i can say you for sure: every possibility of the original architect speech was tried as password in the last 2 years.
We lost yin yang again which was founded few second ago, rest in peace yin yang, we lost them 👻
We must not give up, let's start over, there is a way out, the architect said so. Let us free our minds, discard all other thoughts, and the answer will appear. Simulacra Simulation
we need to figure out primes then hit yinyang and we will solve it at same day
We’re still chipping away at this offline. We’re pretty sure the “story” really is stored in dbbib → faed → btcseed/post, not in some other random string. From there we get stable S / H / L rails with the usual markers (SENDTHE / TOSETHEX / BLUENET), and a few check formulas that hit cleanly (same tail windows, keep gates, that sort of thing) — but they read more like verifiers than the final AES key. Puzzle IR @54–56 and spiral vs. row-major on faed change real bytes in that zone; trifid still throws CHAO / HALF-shaped windows if you use the obvious keys. We also see VIC + reins line up with the “private key / half” wording — again, semantic, not BLOB yet. No BLOB1 for us — so we’re probably missing one last binary compose step Jrk meant by yinyang. If anyone’s sitting on a clean dbbib/faed read or a post-BTCSEED transform that isn’t just another sha16 sweep, happy to compare notes. 🤝
we still need just for the yinyang to be the fead
We would understand that you are just looking for the Bitcoin which the creator already hinted us about. You have to be looking for the truth and not just the Bitcoin as there is way more information encoded in the puzzle itself for educational purposes but do not be caught off guard because Neo's passport expiration date, prime numbers for yellow and blue, yinyang... these can't be all given for nothing. You just have to know when and how to apply them. But for a fact, I know that The transpose of a matrix is denoted with a single quote and called prime, ying and yang are opposites that attract which is also in the same context. matrix sumlist is where the major information needed for the application of dbbi and faed but I bet you that you can't go any further if you don't decode dbbib and faed because therein lies the last words before archi choice in the creator's own words and answer too.
what about the aes strings in salph + cosmic duality?
What are your current theories about cosmic duality?
what came after? yinyang, prime numbers.
what can be considered 'half' and 'better half' ? a couple... or sun and moon if referred to duality
What did you supposedly solve? Cosmic? SalphaseIon? Architect?
What do you guys think yin yang is? Honestly, no bullshit.
what if its too specific relating to the yin yang
what if the meaning to the salvation is just to find the words spoken by the architect before the choice given to neo and his response?
"What if the merovingian is wrong."
What if the merovingian is wrong. What instead of causality something else could be ours? Therefor, if so, the ...... is ours
What if the merovingian is wrong. What instead of causality something else could be ours? Therefor, if so, the ...... is ours. The thinker's 1name behind all of that would grant you access to the next step (of humanity). Definitely look into his works might you have time. /(aa,connected enf)
What if the "yinyang" hint doesn't actually mean that you need to form a literal yinyang? What if it's a metaphor to go back and review a body if text?
What if.. yinyang means re-image and re-interpretationthe first rabbit image becomes:
what if you need to reinsert the primes into yingyang ( 3.2.)
What i'm thinking is aes3.2 blob and salphaseion aes key is hidden in "cosmic duality"
what is the only prime numbers mention in the puzzle unlocked content? Architect`s speech in 3.2 phase? "Now your mission is to return to the source codes you hopefully carry reinserting the prime basics..."
what really eats me is cosmic duality tho.... most here including myself forget sometimes that its still there...
whats the format of the yingyang?
whats yingyang even?
what to do with the yinyang?
what we know for sure is: salphaseion result decrypts Cosmic Duality blob. In Phase 2 and Phase 3 was the same principle.
what we know, we need to descrypt cosmic duality, the only hint its on salphaselon, we discovery 7 passwords to descrypt
What we will get if the Cosmic Duality decrypted?
what you are seeing is the information encoded with the unknown waveform state (phase and amplitude), in this specific case the Yin-Yang symbol, successfully reconstructed after superposition with a known source is split into a biphoton state and separately imaged.
when ask cosmic duality to Google, it simply returns Yin and Yang almost at the first result
When examining the prime numbers, attention should be paid to the cover of the book Cosmic Duality. The cosmic/dual imagery on the cover may be meaningful when considering how prime numbers could function as references to a book cipher or some form of textual encoding, rather than just numerical significance.
when he said "when yingyang is reached, 2 hours max"
When i am using 3.2 aes with same setting it also giving me gibberish just because of encoding ibm 1141, i think i have to choose encoding different for coamic duality
when i make a python3 code to change the picture to be like yinyang this what i have ..
When i say JRK i mean the architect
When it comes to the 2 (or perhaps 3) alternative pathways (the roses are red direction, the rabbit hole direction as as of late the visual elements direction), only the 1st one has any confirmation that it might be a sort of a 2nd prize. Which too is a good clarification as many in here think that SalPhaseIon and Cosmic Duality phase have anything to do with the original or the 1st direction (especially in relation to decrypting U2FsdGVkX1+0Wl49gnWTyiimluu7V3+vl7st0gUt9sWDzNLxDmlPMsDSiuW2a46z
When neo went into the architect building, if he didnt do everything correct, the building would blow up..
when that fragment is done, i suppose the cosmic duality can be decrypted which leads to the final phase. thats what Jrk is waitng for sicne years.
When the Architect told Neo Trinity was going to die. He gave him 2 choice, to either take the door by the right or left. One leads to the source where he needs the prime program and the other door leads to Trinity where he's going to try and save her. Now he saved Trinity at that particular time but then he went ahead to go to the source with the prime program he hopefully carried. But Trinity died in the machine city. Where you and I would call the source. So in either way he could have done it. Either door led to the source and from the choice he had to make both of the choices she died either ways. Now here we are where we had gone from phase 0 to phase 3.2 and we've got to choose 2 doors in order to get the private key. Either door needs the prime program because both doors definitely leads to the source from any angle you choose to view it from. The prime program is the only way forward now. And how to use it is the next thing
When the first part of the puzzle was solved, the developers of the puzzle could have known that someone had reached the solution. His visit to the seed page, but the second time, JRK's words were clear. Even if someone finds the other door, they will not be able to know that. In my opinion, the second chapter is related to the stage of salvation and understanding how to decrypt the insulting parts using the image, because at this stage, at least, before the cosmic duality, I don't think there are more links for this reason. The developers won't know if anyone finds the door.
when u search cosmic duality
When we decrypt the cosmic duality phase then we go on the ying yang phase
When We find the keymaker then you will find the Rest by itself
when yinyang is reached, 2 hour max. decentraland released to public on 02,20,2020
when yoi3 hit the yinyang you gonna solve it in same day ..is that mean
when you are able to solve the first blob you have to concatenate the result  from dbbib and faed with the result from the blob to decipher cosmic duality
When you reach the state of yingyang, you will definitely not confuse it with anything else.
When you search for cosmic-duality on Google, you find this
Where are prime numbers used? Does that help in solving Salphaseion or cosmic duality?
where do you store your py script locally? full directory if possible, just trying to figure out a cool place to store files on my computer that are important, and are you on a Windows PC, or Linux, also what architecture is it x86 or x64, just wondering what everyone else uses in chat
Where he meets Sati, which you can see in cosmic duality AES i think
where is Oracle? 😄
Which I don't see decrypted yet and cosmic duality.
Which will open up for us the cosmic duality
while on the topic of that architect scene, I've tried to bruteforce some absurd number of permutations build from the transcript of that scene
Whoever created this puzzle also likes books. Fubcd king and oracle queen, when typed into google leads to The Tamir Triad book series, although it's confusing as to what significance it has to the whole puzzle. Also someone in here before referred to the Blue Roses poem by rudyard kipling that could be somehow related, as it refers to roses red and roses white, from the last hint.
who the hell knows. this puzzle is a cosmic duality
Who thinks he understand the connection between Cosmic duality , this Puzzle , and Bitcoin ?
Why did I wake up in the architect's bedroom? It is quite logical to guess the password to the cipher 🎯
why do people say that the last stage is SalPhaselon, and not cosmic duality - has someone solved cosmic duality already? Or do people consider Salphaselon and Cosmic Duality the same puzzle?
why do you think Cosmic Duality is sub puzzle of Salph?
Why is nobody talking about the oracle?
with these hints from Jrk I think we may be able to decode the Cosmic Duality AES string. the hint following that had "yingyang" in it
X, I already give you half answer regarding anagram, answer is funny, just few part is pending to unlock cosmic duality, as we don't know the dbbi and faed decryption method
- X = SafeNet (alphabetical sum = 70) — "ironic ²name of keymakers"
yeah but it was on salph or cosmic duality?
Yeah did you finish reading the cosmic duality book?
yeah he asked for the yinyang too, so i think that is the first hint for it or?
yeah it's either them or architect and oracle...
Yeah seems interesting, when i'm trying to search on google "Schavagh jav" then only one pdf available there which is related to japenese transalation or some type of "rotter" related pdf file in which yin yang etc have means like "ton" "rost" "far" "ois" "ventus" etc etc(these are wording for yin yang in latin language etc etc" not saying i'm right but got the only single single result over internet with that pdf 🤷‍♂️ and pdf file name is "august strindberg"
Yeah too many combination of yin yang and primes too
yellow blue prime .matrix sum list lastwordsbeforearchichoice yin yang I think its explanation is as follows yellow blue primesmeans replacing letters that are located locations of yellow-blue squares
Yellow blue primes = dbbib and yin yang is faed?
"yellow blue primes matrix sumlist last words before archichoice yinyang
yellow blue primes  matrix sumlist last words before archichoice yinyang
yellow blue primes matrix sumlist last words before archichoice yinyang
yellow blue primes matrix sumlist last words before archichoice yinyang  idont see on this hint matrix sum i see sumlist
"yellow blue prime s matrix sum list last words before archi choice yin yang we wont give away the password its in front of your eyes but youre not seeing it very last step is a true give away promised."
"yellowblueprimesmatrixsumlistlastwordsbeforearchichoiceyinyangwewontgiveawaythepassworditsinfrontofyoureyesbutyourenotseeingitverylaststepisatruegiveawaypromised"
yellow blue prime s matrix sum list last words before archi choice yin yang we wont give away the password its in front of your eyes but youre not seeing it very last step is a true give away promised.
yellow blue prime s matrix sum list last words before archi choice yin yang we wont give away the password its in front of your eyes but youre not seeing it very last step is a true give away promised."
yellow blue primes matrix sumlist last words before archichoice yinyang we wont give away thepassword its in front of  your eyes but youre not seeing it very last step is a true give away promised
yellowblueprimesmatrixsumlistlastwordsbeforearchichoiceyinyangwewontgiveawaythepassworditsinfrontofyoureyesbutyourenotseeingitverylaststepisatruegiveawaypromised
yellowblueprimesmatrixsumlistyinyang   <— (hints within hints, this was given inside of "reversed binary")
yellow blue primes yinyang
Yes, actually the beauty of this puzzle is every owrd you see related to this puzzle its seem connected but yes one of your guy already hits yin yang, he just need prime, however he may have prime as well(which i don't, in my case) but he don't know as he is carrying key
yes , architect and neo
Yes as per yin yang yellow represent yang and blue represent yin but creator took opposite
Yes, but it is a remnant from the architect's speech, this text was not written by Jrk. On the other hand it wasn't removed by Jrk 😁, so that's a valid point. But I'm still more inclined to believe in the theory that the primes are for Salph because of his messages.
Yes, cosmic duality is next phase, if there any other phase instead of cosmic duality and salphaseion then its better me to quit here 😂😂
Yes duality
yes i always thought about it like you, but i try to look at the phrases from another perspective. it also can be interpreted that the last words before the architect gives the two choices to neo: There are two doors. ... or As you adequately put, the problem ist choice.
Yes i do know its not impossible but have to get site engineer to build that home who can afford forest while my habits not under control of my self and i can't pay huge architect fee but yes i can offord to adopt other house who offer me adoption or select me as his next nominee of his property
yes, i mean that too, i mean in saplh + duality part
Yes I'm the keymaker, I've been waiting for you
Yes it is warning, and logic is yin yang, warning, is what you are seeing 👍🏻
Yes or not, but all are right as per the concept of this puzzle, but the best part is this puzzle duality upon duality, i am not superior but yes today hint confirmed that i was right but just opposite with same concept
yes, @SoWut [https://t.me/SoWut] said when you reach to yin yang it will probably take 1 days to solve
yes... so you see this whole speech is spoken from the perspective of the architect.
Yes. That's the yin/yang part I checked: if you reverse it, you get the same answer.
yes, what i was pointing out is how that architect phrase pointed the existence of 2 doors, 1 to salphaseion other to a matrix.
Yes X, i do understand, its interesting and that is why this puzzle last phase is cosmic duality, ass hole pain(salphaseion anagram)
Yes, yinyang is much more than that
Yin and Yang, duality
Yingyang...
ying yang coming from Cosmic Duality
Ying yang ==Cosmic duality
yingyang could simply mean binary
ying yang -> decoded duality
"Ying Yang" instead of "Yinyang"
yingyang is black and white in the first puzzle piece 86 , 86 , perfect balance.
Yingyang is the last part , and if you reached it then congratulations
Ying yang phase is after the cosmic duality phase
yingyang salvation each caesar safe
yingyang unrelated to primes
yin yang
yin yang?
yinyang
Yin yang
Yin yang ✅
Yin yang?
Yinyang
yinyang = 7 chars (PRIME)
yinyang, 89727c598b9cd1cf8873f27cb7057f050645ddb6a7a157a110239ac0152f6a32
Yin yang became a canonical hint after the book cover was posted by a user, until then it didn't appear anywhere right?
Yin yang copehngan park is yin yang park where two pandas are left and need funds to care
YinYang = Cosmic Duality
Yin yang could go any of 1000 directions
Yinyang- could literally be "yinyang" or more than likely something pulled from the cosmic duality book
Yinyang could mean cosmic duality.
yin yang everywhere
Yin yang fits this theory too as a ying yang carries a piece of it's other side within it, so enter the puzzle into the puzzle so to speak, hope all can follow these thoughts
yin yang found
YinYang, from nothing to something, from something to nothing, the basis of all things
yinyang = HALF AND BETTER HALF
Yin yang have too much
yin yang i believe will mean how it all flows into each other with a common theme or method of solving...
yin yang is about opposites. inverse. it's not about yellow or blue but we need this also this 2 opposites colors. also and on hint from jrk  Roses are White but often Red.  remove OF from word often you will have ten 10 :D and here is a ten xDDD  fucked up I know xDDDDD
Yin/yang is duality theme of the puzzle. From the puzzle image you have 2 doors -> one leads to the architect where we are shown a scenario without choice. And Salphation is the other door where we get free choice, which is not always so good, as it leads to less certainty
Yin yang is important, believe me, yin yang is metaphor
yinyang is just a next step after Salph
Yin yang is just metaphor, no link about it, yin yang means in this puzzle duality, creator is discussing another matter and totally opposite, 😂
YinYang is just reference to cosmic duality (book)
Yin yang is metaphor,
Yin yang is next phase and last step is true give away, not prime is last step, i noticed that jrk used prime(word) long time ago after that he didn't use that prime words, you guys already far far away was his statement
yin yang is often considered a duality right?
Yin Yang is related with Puzzle
"yinyang" is the next phase as Jrk said, so it will be opened later and not relevant right now.  And "prime number is very important to get any further"  not matching your explanation
yinyang is very likely cosmic duality
'yinyang' -> Maybe the opposite? -> 'We Will'
yin yang means "harmony" balance
yin yang = multi signatures
yin yang = opposites, right?
Yin-yang or yingyang?
yinyang or zig-zag?
yin yang part?
yinyang pattern
"yin-yang" - primes / inv primes ? idk (just some opposite stuff combined together)
Yinyang- the character sati in the series is one of the many forms of Shakti, and is the wife of Shiva who is the god of creation, perseverance and destruction. In Hinduism Shakti is considered as the primordial cosmic energy and represents the dynamic forces that are thought to move through the entire universe. This likely means that yinyang is sati, Shakti, or Shiva (or a combination of these)
Yin yang + the g
yin yang the two ciphers at both ends of the z?
yin yang = we are not there yet (next phase aka within a day "the end")
You affirm that you've decrypted cosmic duality ?
You can check any repo you like and reproduce each step of purely logical solution, that lead to Cosmic Duality being decrypted without "Bad Decrypt".
you can send everyone to come ask me if I really did solve dbbi and cosmic duality but the answer to them would always be no because I know for sure who had sent them to ask but I would quickly deny it
You can test it by : openssl enc -e -des3 -a -salt -in jrk_reveal.txt -out cosmic_duality.txt -pass pass:864c9a220f7b99db99cc3c28f9bde60991f041411b98d83de0338602a95b346d
you cant solve the fead without the yin yang last words before arch ..
You decoded the aes block in cosmic duality or a hint in salph?
you decrypted the AES in salphasion and cosmic duality?
you don't have to swap it.... inverse it. yin yang... check  invert, invert linear, invert values. later use OR   and you get prime numbers because that's what we're talking about :D 16382137, 69119 or maybe for AND 257.
you gonna use the yinyang to solve it
YOU HAVEN'T ANSWERED MY QUESTION "ME = The Architect" QUITE RIGHT INTERESTING THAT WAS QUICKER THAN THE OTHERS PLEASE IF YOU
You know how he said "cosmic duality" was very specific and that we need a "yinyang" and that he also mentions "halves"???
You'll be able to decrypt cosmic duality by using the result from the blob. Use your eyes to see
you mean the same gay saying phase2 solution is: "thekeymakertheveninbarrowmatrixoverlordcxb7chancellor"
you must descrypt cosmic duality first.. no anyone yet in this  phase
You realize the pHYs bit in a PNG is for pixel sizes? Or could it stand for prime hole yin-yang sha?
“You’re not looking for the BTC.” What are we actually looking for? Salvation? The “private keymaker?” Another door? I kind of favor the second option, the implication being that we can find a “private keymaker” (maybe the initial seed phrase?) but not be done because we need an additional pass phrase for the wallet?
you're the architect after all. and as architects explain certain things about the matrix, we would certainly love to have some questions answered too. let's say - how long did it take you to design it, and how many litres did you drink of Dozer's degreasing engine and brain cell killing liquid :D
You should meet Oracle, she has your answer for everything
You should read about jrk hint, he never said prime is gonna be use in salphaseion or in cosmic duality
you want to leave the blob in salvation and cosmic duality and start wasting time with the image right>
You will hit a yingyang in next phase
Yup the Salphaseion (Salphation) and the Cosmic Duality
Zero sum game is part of linear progamming duality
Zion is just the continuation of the matrix, if we follow "matrix logic", which will ultimately lead to a new encounter with the architect where the choice will again appear, with 2 choices, both ultimately leading to a loop through infinity.
Межзвездное пространство. Кажется все сходится, с "Cosmic duality"
Почему те кто решиди "salphasion", не раскрывают детали, как они это сделали. В чем смысл секретности если "cosmic duality" является сложным, это потому что головоломка до сих пор не решен. Я думаю логичнее раскрыть детали взлома "salphasion", всем откроется дорога, так к разгадке подключатся другие игроки которые более способны к решению этой задачи.
