Harmony from a Divided Universe
Like the two sides of a single coin, the opposing principles of the cosmos are never far apart.
Feast alternates with famine, night follows the day, and birth begins a life story that ends in death.
To make sense of this ceaseless interplay, some faiths envision single but ambivalent deities like the particolored Shiva at near left.
In their own divine persons, such androgynous gods represent both life and death, creation and destruction, divine justice and malicious fate.
Traditional Chinese philosophy takes a more abstract view, envisioning all aspects of the universe in terms of two distinct forces called yin and yang.
Sometimes referred to as the receptive and the creative principles, or the passive and the active, yin and yang embody almost every conceivable duality.
Yin, for example, is linked to the ideas of femininity, darkness, night, valleys, and the directions west and north, while yang represents masculinity, light, daytime, mountains, east, and south.
Despite the utter opposition between the two principles, however, good fortune follows only when both the yin and yang are present to the same degree, a state of cosmic balance gracefully depicted in the classical image at far left.
Paired dragons guard the pinwheel emblem of yin and yang in this eighteenth-century Vietnamese mother-of-pearl inlay.
Each of the two forces, locked in harmony as much as in opposition, holds the seed of its opposite: The dark yin contains a tiny speck of yang, and the paler yang embodies an embryonic germ of yin.
Half black and half white, Shiva balances atop a tamed demon and a bull, respective tokens of death and fertility, in the seventeenth-century Hindu painting above.
Powerful because he unifies all opposites, Shiva is at once the source of maternal gentleness as well as of the warrior's strength.
harmony from a divided universe
receptive and the creative principles
passive and the active
cosmic balance
dark yin contains a tiny speck of yang
paler yang embodies an embryonic germ of yin
seed of its opposite
embryonic germ of yin
tiny speck of yang
the seed of its opposite
The Unity of Opposites
In the beginning, God created the heaven and the earth
Creation seems to imply contrast: Light reveals darkness; morning ends the night.
For most societies, however, the great dualities of nature are not unalterably opposed.
light confronts darkness, the genders commingle, and death dances with life in scenes of rebirth and resurrection
Even good and evil are conjoined in such ambiguous figures as the snake
yin and yang
two distinct forces called yin and yang
femininity darkness night valleys west and north
masculinity light daytime mountains east and south
state of cosmic balance
unity of opposites
dualities as old as time
